## Page 1

We are IntechOpen,
the world’s leading publisher of
Open Access books
Built by scientists, for scientists
6,600 179,000 195M
Open access books available International authors and editors Downloads
Our authors are among the
154 TOP 1% 12.2%
Countries delivered to most cited scientists Contributors from top 500 universities
Selection of our books indexed in the Book Citation Index
in Web of Science™ Core Collection (BKCI)
Interested in publishing with us?
Contact book.department@intechopen.com
Numbers displayed above are based on latest data collected.
For more information visit www.intechopen.com

## Page 2

Chapter
Medicinal Plants for Treatment of
Prevalent Diseases
Susana Oteng Mintah, Tonny Asafo-Agyei, Mary-Ann Archer,
Peter Atta-Adjei Junior, Daniel Boamah, Doris Kumadoh,
Alfred Appiah, Augustine Ocloo, Yaw Duah Boakye
and Christian Agyare
Abstract
This chapter focuses on reviewing publications on medicinal plants used in the
treatment of common diseases such as malaria, cholera, pneumonia, tuberculosis
and asthma. Traditional medicine is still recognized as the preferred primary health
care system in many rural communities, due to a number of reasons including
affordability and effectiveness. The review concentrated on current literature on
medicinal plants, highlighting on information about ethnobotany, phytochemistry
and pharmacology. The search for publications on medicinal plants with scientifi-
cally proven efficacy was carried out using electronic databases such as Science
Direct, Google Scholar, SciFinder and PubMed. In all, about 46 species of different
families with potent biological and pharmacological activities were reviewed. All
the plants reviewed exhibited potent activity confirming their various traditional
uses and their ability to treat prevalent diseases.
Keywords: medicinal plants, malaria, diarrhea, tuberculosis, asthma
1. Introduction
Traditional medicine is still recognized as the preferred primary health care sys-
tem in many communities, with over 60% of the world’s population and about 80%
in developing countries depending directly on medicinal plants for their medical
purposes [1]. This is due to a number of reasons including affordability, accessibility
and low cost [2].
The use of plants to cure several kinds of human diseases has a long history.
Various parts of plants such as leaf, stem, bark, root, etc. are being used to prevent,
allay symptoms or revert abnormalities back to normal. Since the practice of “herbal
remedies” does not adhere strictly to facts accrued using scientific approaches,
orthodox medicine sees “herbal medicines” as an alternative medicine. However,
most of the pharmaceutical products currently dispensed by physicians have a long
history of use as herbal remedies, including opium, aspirin, digitalis and quinine.
Modern medicine today utilizes active compounds isolated from higher plants, and
about 80% of these active ingredients indicate a positive correlation between their
modern therapeutic use and the traditional uses [3].
1

## Page 3

Pharmacognosy - Medicinal Plants
The search for, and use of drugs and dietary supplements obtained from plants
have increased in recent years. Scientist such as pharmacologists, microbiologists,
botanists, and phytochemists are combing the Earth for phytochemicals and clues
that could be developed into medicines for various diseases treatment. This study
therefore reviewed electronic database (Google Scholar, SciFinder, PubMed, etc.)
for medicinal plants that have potent activity in treating some prevalent and com-
mon ailments like malaria, diarrhea, tuberculosis, pneumonia and asthma.
2. Medicinal plants with demonstrated anti-malarial activity
Malaria is one of the world’s most important parasitic disease and a leading cause
of death especially in developing countries [4]. It is endemic in about 100 develop-
ing countries, leading to about 1.2 million estimated deaths each year in Africa [5],
with pregnant women and children below 5 years being mostly affected [6]. A wide
range of medicinal plants is employed for the treatment of malaria, since major-
ity of the people who get infected cannot afford the existing expensive orthodox
medicines [7]. The problem of resistance to existing antimalarial agents by parasite
has necessitated the search for new and potent agents, and the focus of research-
ers is on natural products especially medicinal plants since active compounds like
quinine and artemisinin were isolated from plants and have been lead compounds
for antimalarial drug development [8, 9]. Various medicinal plants have been
investigated for their anti-malarial activity and some with demonstrated potent in
vitro activity have been reviewed below.
2.1 Cryptolepis sanguinolenta
C. sanguinolenta (Lindl.) Schlechter (Apocynaceae) is known by Ghanaians as
‘Ghana quinine’ and specifically by the Asantes and Ewes as ‘Nibima’ and ‘Kadze,’
respectively [10]. It is a twining and scrambling thin-stemmed shrub, indigenous
to Africa, with much ethno-medicinal importance and interest in the West African
sub-region [11]. It is used traditionally for the treatment of malaria, upper respiratory
and urinary tract infections, diarrhea, hypertension and as cicatrizant of wounds
[12, 13]. The ethanolic and aqueous extracts of C. sanguinolenta exhibited an in vitro
antiplasmodial activity against multi-drug resistance Plasmodium falciparum (K1)
strain, with all the extracts inhibiting 90% of parasite growth at concentrations below
23 μg/mL. The ethanolic roots and leaves extracts showed potent activity with IC of
50
0.895 ± 0.02 and 3.01 ± 0.02 μg/mL, respectively. While the aqueous roots and leaves
extracts had IC of 2.32 ± 0.3 and 13.5 ± 0.7 μg/mL, respectively [14]. Evaluating the
50
clinical efficacy of a tea bag formulation of the root of C. sanguinolenta in patients with
uncomplicated malaria showed that within 72 h, Fifty percent (50%) of the patients
had their P. falciparum parasitaemia cleared, and all patients, by Day 7. By Day 3, all
presenting symptoms such as fever, chills, nausea and vomiting were completely no
more. The overall cure rate when one tea bag of C. sanguinolenta was taken three times
a day for 5 days was 93.5%, due to two cases of recrudescence on Days 21 and 28 [15].
2.2 Terminalia ivorensis
T. ivorensis A. Chev. belongs to the family Combretaceae and is commonly known
as ‘black afara’ and by the Asantes as ‘amire.’ It is a large deciduous forest tree of
15–46 m high, normally grown as timber plantation in many tropical countries [16].
In traditional medicine, various parts of the plant is used to treat malaria, yellow
fever, pile, stomach ulcer, wounds and other infections [17, 18]. A study by Komlaga
2

## Page 4

Medicinal Plants for Treatment of Prevalent Diseases
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.82049
et al. [19] revealed an active in vitro antiplasmodial activity of T. ivorensis aqueous
leaf extract, against P. falciparum chloroquine-sensitive (3D7) and chloroquine
resistant (W2) strains with IC of 0.64 ± 0.14 and 10.52 ± 3.55 μg/mL, respectively.
50
The ethanolic stem bark extract also showed an in vitro antimalarial activity against
chloroquine-resistant strains of P. falciparum with an IC of 6.949 μg/mL [20].
50
2.3 Elaeis guineensis
E. guineensis Jacq (Arecaceae), popularly known as oil palm is a monocotyledon-
ous plant which belongs to the coccoid group of palms. It grows up to 15 m high
with a lifetime of over 100 years and occurs throughout the tropical rainforest belt
of West Africa [21]. E. guineensis is commonly used for treating gonorrhea, rheuma-
tism, headache, wounds [22]. An in vitro anti-plasmodial assay revealed that, the
ethanolic extract of E. guineensis leaves has potent antimalarial activity with IC of
50
1.195 μg/mL, against chloroquine-resistant P. falciparum [20].
2.4 Phyllanthus emblica
P. emblica L. of the family Euphorbiaceae is a deciduous medium-sized plant
(10–18 m high), native to tropical south eastern Asia and widely distributed in most
subtropical and tropical countries. It is commonly known as Indian gooseberry, rich
in vitamin C, minerals and amino acids which helps to build up lost vitality and vigor
[23, 24]. Various parts of the plant is used traditionally for the treatment of diarrhea,
inflammation, diabetes, jaundice, cough, asthma, peptic ulcer, skin diseases, leprosy,
intermittent fevers, headache, anemia, dizziness, snakebite and scorpion-sting [25]. In
an SYBR green I-based fluorescence assay to assess the anti-plasmodial potential of P.
emblica, the methanol leaf extract exhibited potent activity against CQ-sensitive (3D7)
and CQ-resistant (Dd2 and INDO) strains of P. falciparum with IC of 3.125, 4.8 and
50
5 μg/mL, respectively. Also the ethyl acetate leaf extract showed activity with IC of
50
7.25, 15 and 9 μg/mL against 3D7, Dd2 and INDO P. falciparum strains, respectively [26].
2.5 Syzygium aromaticum
S. aromaticum (L.) Merril. & Perry, syn. Eugenia caryophyllata, an ancient and
valuable spice is a member of the family Myrtaceae and is commonly known as
clove. It is mostly used as a spice to flavor all kinds of foods and has other medicinal
values including anthelmintic, anti-asthma and other allergic disorders, anti-inflam-
matory, antioxidant, antiviral and anti-parasitic properties [27]. A study by Bagavan
et al. [26], revealed the antimalarial activity of methanol extract of S. aromaticum
flower buds with IC of 6.25, 9.5 and 10 μg/mL against P. falciparum CQ-sensitive
50
(3D7) and CQ-resistant (Dd2 and INDO) strains, respectively.
2.6 Goniothalamus marcanii
G. tamirensis Pierre ex Finet & Gagnep is an accepted synonym for the species
and is from the family Annonaceae. It occurs naturally in tropical and subtropical
parts of Southeast Asia. 80%-EtOH extracts showed an in vitro antimalarial activity
(IC = 6.3 μg/mL) against the drug resistant K1 strain of P. falciparum [28].
50
2.7 Casearia sylvestris
C. sylvestris var. lingua (Cambess.) Eichler, (Salicaceae) is an evergreen shrub
or small tree with long, slender branches and a very dense globose crown. Usually
3

## Page 5

Pharmacognosy - Medicinal Plants
4–6 m tall, but can grow up to 20 m high, with wide distribution throughout
South America. It has been employed in traditional medicine for treating snake
bites, wounds, inflammation, fevers, gastric ulcers and diarrhea [29]. The hexane
extracts of C. sylvestris stem wood, stem bark, root bark, leaf and root wood as
well as ethanol extract of the root bark, exhibited potent in vitro antiplasmodial
activity against chloroquine-resistance FcB1/Colombia P. falciparum strain with
IC values of 0.9 ± 0.2, 1.0 ± 0.4, 1.2 ± 0.4, 1.3 ± 0.1, 2.3 ± 0.5 and 7.7 ± 1.1 μg/mL,
50
respectively [30].
2.8 Cupania vernalis
C. vernalis Cambess. (Sapindaceae) is a semi-deciduous tree with elongated and
dense crown, which can grow up to 10–22 m tall. It can be found in almost all forest
formations in Brazil, South America, Argentina, Uruguay, Paraguay and Bolivia.
The tree serves as source of tannins and wood locally, and in traditional medicine as
diuretic, stimulant, expectorant, natural surfactant, sedative and for treating stom-
ach-ache and dermatitis [31]. The hexane and ethanol leaf extracts showed active
antimalarial activity against chloroquine-resistance (FcB1/Colombia) P. falciparum
with IC of 0.9 ± 0.3 and 6.6 ± 0.2 μg/mL, respectively [30].
50
2.9 Xylopia emarginata
X. emarginata Mart. is a species of plant in the Annonaceae family. It is native
to Cerrado vegetation in Brazil. It is an evergreen tree with a very narrow, almost
columnar crown which can grow up to 10–20 m tall and 30–40 cm in diameter. It
usually grows in large clusters, forming a homogeneous mass. It is a species character-
istic of swamp forest, and does not grow in the driest places. It is used as a condiment
in food, a carminative and aphrodisiac in traditional medicine [32]. X. emarginata
hexane root bark and stem bark extracts were able to inhibit P. falciparum (chloro-
quine-resistance FcB1/Colombia strains) with IC of 4.9 ± 0.2 and 5.2 ± 0.4 μg/mL,
50
respectively [30].
2.10 Xylopia aromatic
X. aromatica (Lam.) Mart. belongs to the family Annonaceae and the accepted
name is X. xylopioides. It is a tree native to Cerrado grassland vegetation, particu-
larly in the states of Goiás and Minas Gerais, in eastern Brazil. It is a medium-
sized tree with long, hanging branches that can make the crown look like a
Christmas tree. Leaves are alternate, narrow, pointed, in a flat plane and arranged
regularly along the branches. It is a common roadside and farmland species of the
Pacific slope, not in the forest [33]. The root wood and root bark hexane extracts
demonstrated an in vitro antimalarial activity against chloroquine-resistance
(FcB1/Colombia) strains of P. falciparum with IC of 4.7 ± 0.9 and 6.8 ± 0.6 μg/mL,
50
respectively [30].
2.11 Aspidosperma macrocarpon
A. macrocarpon Mart. (Apocynaceae) is a deciduous tree with an open crown
growing up to 3–25 m tall and 25-35 cm in diameter. It is a timber tree, native to
Brazil, Venezuela, Bolivia, Paraguay and Peru. Traditionally, it is employed in the
treatment of fever [33]. The in vitro antiplasmodial study of the ethanol extract
revealed an effective activity against P. falciparum (chloroquine-resistance FcB1/
Colombia) with an IC of 4.9 ± 1.1 μg/mL [30].
50
4

## Page 6

Medicinal Plants for Treatment of Prevalent Diseases
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.82049
2.12 Azadirachta indica
A. indica A. Juss is commonly known as neem tree or Indian lilac and belongs to
the mahogany family Meliaceae. It is an evergreen, fast-growing tree that can reach
a height of 15–20 m with few of them growing up to 35–40 m, but in severe drought
it may shed most of its leaves or nearly all leaves. It is typically grown in tropical and
semi-tropical regions. Neem is effective against certain fungi that infect humans
and hence used to treat skin diseases like eczema, psoriasis [34]. The 80% metha-
nol leaf extract showed in vitro anti-plasmodial activity against chloroquine and
pyrimethamine sensitive, 3D7 strain, and chloroquine resistant and pyrimethamine
sensitive, Dd2 strain, with IC of 5.8 and 1.7 μg/mL, respectively [35].
50
2.13 Harrisonia abyssinica
H. abyssinica Oliv. of the family Rutaceae, is a spiny, evergreen shrub that
branches from the base and can become a spreading or much-branched tree. It
usually grows up to 6–13 m tall and commonly found in Tropical Africa, in the areas
of Sierra Leone, Cameroon, Sudan, Ethiopia, Uganda, Kenya, Angola, Zambia and
Mozambique [33]. The methanolic stem bark extract inhibited chloroquine resistant
P. falciparum strain Dd2, with IC value of 4.7 ± 0.113 while in chloroquine sensi-
50
tive P. falciparum strain 3D7, the IC value was 10 ± 0.114 μg/mL [35].
50
2.14 Maytenus senegalensis
M. senegalensis Lam. Exell which belongs to the family Celastraceae is an
African shrubs or trees widely distributed throughout Central and South America,
Southeast Asia, Micronesia and Australasia, the Indian Ocean and Africa, growing
up to 15 m high with spines up to 7 cm long. Traditionally, it is an anti-inflammatory
herbal drug and is useful in treating toothaches [36]. The stem bark methanol
extract showed anti-plasmodial activity with IC of 3.9 and 10 μg/mL when treated
50
in vitro on chloroquine sensitive, 3D7 and chloroquine resistant, Dd2 strains,
respectively [35].
3. Medicinal plants with demonstrated activity against Vibrio cholera
Cholera is an acute intestinal disease caused by a facultative anaerobic, Gram-
negative, comma-shaped rod bacterium, known as V. cholerae. Cholera is a life
threatening disease transmitted by the fecal-oral route. The organisms adhere to
and colonize the small bowel within a short incubation period, where they secrete
cholera enterotoxin leading to severe and watery diarrhea accompanied with
vomiting, dehydration and eventually death if not treated promptly [37]. Various
antibiotics have been effective for the treatment of cholera; however, the worldwide
problem of microbial resistance to existing antimicrobial medicines has led to most
antibiotic failure. Researchers are therefore shifting their focus to natural products,
especially medicinal plant, with effective antimicrobial properties. Some medicinal
plants with potent anti-cholera activity are reviewed below.
3.1 Terminalia chebula
T chebula Retz. (Combretaceae) commonly known as black or chebulic myroba-
.
lan is a medium to large deciduous tree growing up to 30 m tall, with a trunk of
1 m in diameter. It leaves are oval, alternate to subopposite in arrangement and is
5

## Page 7

Pharmacognosy - Medicinal Plants
a native to South Asia, from India and Nepal east to southwest China, Sri Lanka,
Malaysia and Vietnam. Traditionally, it has been used for treatment of indiges-
tion, diarrhea and diabetes [38]. The plant extract used to treat Cholera worked
effectively against the strains of V. cholera the causative agent. The methanol fruit
extract of T. chebula had strong bactericidal activity with MIC ranging from 0.125 to
1.5 mg/mL and MBC ranging from 0.25 to 2 mg/mL, against multi-drug resistance
strains of V. cholerae (serotypes O1, O139, and non-O1, non-O139) [39].
3.2 Syzygium cumini
S. cumini (L.) Skeels (Myrtaceae), known as Jam is an evergreen tropical tree,
native to the Indian Subcontinent, adjoining regions of Southeast Asia, China and
Queensland. It Grows up to 30 m and can live more than 100 years, with a dense
foliage which provides shade and is grown just for its ornamental value. The leaves
are pinkish when young, and changes to dark green with a yellow midrib as they
mature [40]. The seeds have traditionally been used to treat diarrhea, dysentery, piles,
indigestion and diabetes. S. cumini methanol seed extract exhibited a bactericidal
anti-cholera activity against multi-drug resistance strains of V. cholerae (serotypes O1,
O139, and non-O1, non-O139), with MICs and MBCs ranging from 1.25–3 mg/mL
[39]. Also Sharma et al. [41] reported the in vitro anti-vibrio activity of the ethanolic
stem bark extract against different strains of V. cholera with MICS ranging from 2.5 to
20 mg/mL.
3.3 Saraca indica
S. indica auct. L. commonly known as Asoka-tree or Ashok is a plant belonging to
the Detarioideae subfamily of the Fabaceae family. Asoka tree is an evergreen tree with
a spreading crown which can grow up to 24 m tall and 34 cm in diameter. The original
plant specimen came from Java. Some traditional uses of the plant include treatment
of dyspepsia, fever, burning sensation, colic, ulcers, menorrhagia, leucorrhoea,
pimples [42]. S. indica evoked strong bactericidal activity against different strains of
multi-drug resistance V. cholera, with MBCs ranging from 1 to 4 mg/mL [39]. A study
by Sharma et al. [41] also showed the anti-vibrio potential of the ethanolic stem bark
extract, with MICs range of 2.5–10 mg/mL against 13 strains of V. cholera.
3.4 Butea monosperma
B. monosperma (Lam.) Taub. (Papilionaceae) is a native to tropical and sub-
tropical parts of the Indian Subcontinent and Southeast Asia, ranging across India,
Bangladesh, Nepal, Sri Lanka, Myanmar, Thailand, Laos, Cambodia, Vietnam,
Malaysia and western Indonesia. Common names include flame-of-the-forest and
bastard teak. It is a medium-sized dry season-deciduous tree, growing to 15 m tall.
Leaves are pinnate, with (8–16 cm) petiole and three leaflets of 10–20 cm long. Its
flowers are used in traditional medicine for the treatment of ulcer, inflammation,
hepatic disorder and eye diseases [43]. The methanol flower extract showed anti-
cholera activity with MIC and MBC ranging from 1.75 to 5 mg/mL against different
strains of multi-drug resistance V. cholera [39].
3.5 Euphorbia serpens
E. serpens Kunth is a member of the Euphorbiaceae family. It is native to South
America but it can be found on most continents as an introduced species and often
a weed. This is an annual herb forming a mat of prostrate stems [44]. Purified
6

## Page 8

Medicinal Plants for Treatment of Prevalent Diseases
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.82049
bioactive fraction of aqueous extract of E. serpens exhibited an anti-Vibrio activity
at a Minimum Inhibitory Concentration of 3.92 mg/mL [45].
3.6 Acacia farnesiana
Vachellia farnesiana, also known as A. farnesiana (L.) Willd, commonly known
as sweet acacia or needle bush, is a species of shrub or small tree in the legume
family, Fabaceae. The species grows to a height of 4.6–9.1 m and grows multiple
trunks. V. farnesiana has been used in Colombia to treat malaria, in the Philippines
the leaves are traditionally rubbed on the skin to treat skin diseases in livestock. In
Malaysia, an infusion of the plant’s flowers and leaves is mixed with turmeric for
post-partum treatment [46]. The bark methanolic extract revealed a potent bacteri-
cidal activity against two strains of V. cholera, O139 (AI-1837) and O1 (569-B) with
MBCs of 0.5 ± 0.1 and 0.9 ± 0.1, respectively [47].
3.7 Artemisia ludoviciana
A. ludoviciana (Nutt.) White sagebrush of the family Asteraceae is native to North
America where it is widespread across most of the United States, Canada and Mexico.
It is a rhizomatous perennial plant growing to height of 0.33–1 m. Medicinally, it is
used for dermatological purposes and for treating cold [48]. The anti-cholera activ-
ity of the methanol whole plant extract was effective and bactericidal against O139
(AI-1837) and O1 (569-B) V. cholera strains. The minimum bactericidal concentrations
against the two strains were 0.7 ± 0.2 and 1 ± 0.3, respectively [47].
3.8 Ocimum basilicum
O. basilicum (L.) Basil (Lamiaceae) can be found in Tropical Asia. It is a
perennial growing up to 0.5 m tall and by 0.3 m in diameter. Medicinally it
is used for the treatment of fever, colds, influenza, poor digestion, nausea,
abdominal cramps, gastro-enteritis, migraine, insomnia, depression and exhaus-
tion [49]. The methanol whole plant extract exhibited a bactericidal activity
against V. cholera O139 (AI-1837) and O1 (569-B) strains with MBCs of 2 ± 0.6
and 3 ± 0.5, respectively [47].
3.9 Opuntia ficus
O. ficus-indica (L.) of the family Cactaceae is species of cactus that has long been
domesticated. It is commonly known as prickly pear or Nopal cactus. It originated
from Mexico and cultivated in other parts of the world including Mediterranean
Basin, Middle East and northern Africa [50]. A study by Sánchez et al. [47], revealed
the anti-cholera activity of the methanol cladode extract of O. ficus, with minimum
bactericidal concentrations against O139 (AI-1837) and O1 (569-B) V. cholera strains
to be 3 ± 0.05 and 3 ± 0.1, respectively.
3.10 Lawsonia inermis
L. inermis Linn. (Apocynaceae) commonly known in India as Henna is a flower-
ing plant and the sole species of the genus Lawsonia. It is a tall shrub or small tree,
standing 1.8–7.6 m tall, glabrous and multi-branched, with spine-tipped branchlets.
The henna plant is native to northern Africa, western and southern Asia, northern
Australia, and thrives well in semi-arid zones and tropical areas. It is useful medici-
nally for burning sensation, leprosy, skin diseases, amenorrhoea, and dysmenorrhea
7

## Page 9

Pharmacognosy - Medicinal Plants
and as abortifacient [51]. The ethanolic leaf extract exhibited an in vitro anti-vibrio
activity with MICs ranging from 2.5 to 10 mg/mL against 13 strains of V. cholera [41].
4. Medicinal plants with demonstrated anti-tuberculosis activity
Tuberculosis (TB) is an airborne infectious disease which does not only affect
the lungs but also other parts of the body such as the brain and spine [52]. The main
cause of TB is Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Other M. tuberculosis complex that causes
TB include M. bovis, M. africanum, M. canetti and M. microti [53]. The predomi-
nant symptoms of active TB are fever, night sweat, weight loss and chronic cough
with blood containing sputum. However, most TB infections are latent which may
progress into active disease if left untreated [52]. Treatment of TB is very tedious
and requires a long course with multiple antibiotics involved. However, this fastidi-
ous bacteria have become resistant to most antibiotics, and hence researchers are
working tirelessly to come up with new and effective products especially from
natural products such as medicinal plant. Some medicinal plants that have been
investigated to possess active anti-tuberculosis activity are reviewed below.
4.1 Anogeissus leiocarpa
A. leiocarpa (Combretaceae) commonly called African birch is a tall deciduous
tree which is indigenous to the savannas of tropical Africa. Traditionally, its stem and
root barks are used to treat gonorrhea, worm infestation, cough, asthma and tuber-
culosis [54]. The susceptibility of clinical isolates of M. tuberculosis to the methanolic
extract of A. leiocarpa was investigated using the broth dilution method. The results
demonstrated anti-mycobacterial property (MIC 78 μg/mL). A. leiocarpa fraction
showed an increased anti-mycobacterial activity (MIC 7.8 μg/mL) [55].
4.2 Terminalia avicennioides
T. avicennioides (Combretaceae) is a tree commonly found in West Africa. Its root
bark, fruit and mistletoes are used traditionally to treat diarrhea, hemoptysis, sore
throat, TB, asthma and cough [54]. The in vitro antibacterial studies using broth
dilution method of methanolic extract of T. avicennioides showed a significant anti-
mycobacterial activity (MIC 78 μg/mL) against clinical isolates of M. tuberculosis.
The n-hexane and ethyl acetate fractions obtained from the crude methanol extract
of T. avicennioides showed inhibitory activity (MIC 200 and 625 μg/mL, respec-
tively) against attenuated strains of M. bovis. A further study of T. avicennioides
fraction obtained demonstrated anti-mycobacterial activity (MIC 4.7 μg/mL) [55].
4.3 Capparis brassii
C. brassii (Capparidaceae), the narrow-leaf caper bush is distributed in the coastal
forest and mixed woodland from tropical West Africa to South-East Africa. The root
bark is used to treat TB in folk medicine [54]. The methanol extract of C. brassii has
demonstrated some level of anti-mycobacterial activity (MIC 1.25 mg/mL) against
clinically isolated strains of M. tuberculosis [55].
4.4 Combretum spp.
Combretum (Combretaceae) commonly called the bush willows has about
370 species of shrubs and trees, predominant in southern and tropical Africa,
8

## Page 10

Medicinal Plants for Treatment of Prevalent Diseases
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.82049
Madagascar, Asia and tropical America. Traditionally, its root and stem barks are
used to treat cough, bronchitis and TB [54]. The methanol extract exhibited anti-
mycobacterial activity (MIC 1.25 mg/mL) against M. tuberculosis clinical isolates
when evaluated in vitro using the broth microdilution method [55].
4.5 Solanum torvum
S. torvum (Solanaceae) also called turkey berry is an upright bushy and spiny
perennial plant which is native to the Caribbean, southern Mexico, tropical and
central America. However, it is also widely naturalized in the warmer and coastal
regions of New South Wales, northern and eastern Australia, tropical Africa, Asia,
Papua New Guinea, South-Eastern USA and on several pacific islands. The juice
from this plant is used for the treatment of fever, sore throat, dropsy, rheumatism,
gonorrhea, stomach ache, chest ailment, and asthma, while leaves and fruits can
also be used to control a wide range of microbial activity [56]. The crude leave
extract of S. torvum has demonstrated a significant inhibitory activity against two
stains of M. tuberculosis (H37Ra and H37Rv) with MIC of 156.3 and 1250 μg/mL,
respectively [57].
4.6 Galenia africana
G. africana (Aizoaceae) is an upright green to yellow-green aromatic woody
perennial shrublet commonly found on the western and southern edges of Karoo [16].
The ethanolic extract of G. africana demonstrated anti-mycobacterial activity (MIC
1.2 mg/mL) against M. tuberculosis. A further study of flavone, 5,7,2′-trihydroxyflavone
which was isolated from G. africana showed an increased activity (MIC 0.1 mg/mL)
against M. tuberculosis [58].
4.7 Allium sativum
A. sativum (Amaryllidaceae) popularly called garlic is a bulbous plant,
native to northern and eastern Iran and Central Asia [59], however, garlic can
grow in the wild and in places where it has become naturalized. During World
War I and II, garlic was used as an antiseptic to prevent gangrene [60]. Aside
its reported nutritional value, garlic can demonstrate antimicrobial effect at
temperature as high as 120°C. The aqueous and ethanolic extracts of A. sativum
has shown anti-tuberculosis activity (MIC 0.05 and 0.1 mg/mL, respectively)
against M. tuberculosis, H37Ra via the use of Microplate Alamar Blue Assay
(MABA) [61]. A study by Gupta et al. [62] also showed the inhibitory activity of
A. sativum against multidrug resistant isolates DKU-156 and JAL-1236, as well
as sensitive M. tuberculosis H37Ra with percentage inhibition of 72, 72 and 63%,
respectively.
4.8 Allium cepa
A. cepa commonly called onions is from the family Liliaceae. Onions have several
pharmacological activity such as antidiabetic, antioxidant, anticancer, cardiovascu-
lar, antimicrobial and others [63]. The minimum inhibitory concentration by which
the ethanolic and aqueous extracts of the tissue of A. cepa inhibited the growth of
M. tuberculosis H37Ra was recorded to be 0.1 mg/mL for both extracts [61]. Another
in vitro study showed a 79% proportion of inhibition of aqueous extract of the bulb
of A. cepa against MDR isolate JAL-1236 [62].
9

## Page 11

Pharmacognosy - Medicinal Plants
4.9 Cinnamomum verum
C. verum, (formerly C. zeylanicum) of the family Lauraceae, commonly known
as cinnamon tree is an evergreen small tropical plant native to Sri Lanka, it is also
cultivated in Madagascar and Seychelles on commercial scale [33]. Its anti-tubercu-
losis activity reported by Sivakumar and Jayaraman, [61] revealed that, the aqueous
and ethanolic extracts of the bark of C. verum exhibited anti-mycobacterial activity
(MIC 0.1 and 0.2 mg/mL, respectively) against M. tuberculosis H37Ra.
4.10 Acalypha indica
A. indica popularly known as Indian nettle is from the family Euphorbiaceae. In
Africa, it is distributed in Nigeria, from eastern part of Sudan to Somalia and south
through DR Congo and East Africa to Southern Africa. It also occurs in South-East Asia,
India, Oceania and widely in the Indian Ocean islands. Traditionally, it is used as an
antifungal and antibacterial agent for both human and plant pathogens. It is also used as
an expectorant to treat pneumonia and asthma [33]. The in-vitro study of the aqueous
leave extract of A. indica against MDR isolate DKU-156, JAL-1236 and sensitive M.
tuberculosis H37Rv, demonstrated 95, 68 and 68% inhibition, respectively [62].
5. Medicinal plants with demonstrated activity against pneumonia
Pneumonia is a respiratory tract infection characterized by the inflamma-
tion of one or both lungs as a results of the accumulation of pus in the alveoli.
Pneumonia which can be caused by bacteria, viruses or fungi can be mild, severe
or life threatening. Bacterial pneumonia can be caused by Streptococcus pneu-
moniae which is the commonest cause, Staphylococcus aureus, Moraxella catarrhalis,
Klebsiella pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenza, Chlamydophila pneumonia and
Legionella pneumophila. Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia (PCP) is a fungal pneu-
monia commonly found in immunocompromised patients. Viral pneumonia can
also be caused by adenovirus, Varicella zoster, Influenza virus and respiratory
syncytial virus [64, 65]. Traditionally, medicinal plants have been employed for
treating pneumonia and hence the need to prove, scientifically, their folkloric
uses. Researchers have investigated such plant, and below is a review on some of
the reported plants with demonstrated activity.
5.1 Echinops adenocaulos
In Ethiopian herbal medicine, members of the genus Echinops from family
Asteraceae are used for the treatment of diarrhea, intestinal worm infestation,
hemorrhoids, migraine and different forms of infections [66]. Zamzam water
extract of E. adenocaulos demonstrated an antibacterial activity against multidrug
resistance S. pneumoniae with a minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of
0.781 mg/mL [67].
5.2 Verbascum fruticulosum
Various species of Verbascum, of the family Scrophulariaceae, have been used to treat
pulmonary diseases in traditional medicine as a results of its antibacterial activity against
Klebsiella pneumonia and Staphylococcus aureus [68]. The in vitro antimicrobial activity
of aqueous extract of V. fruticulosum against multidrug resistant clinical isolate of S.
pneumoniae showed a high antibacterial activity with MIC value of 0.195 mg/mL [67].
10

## Page 12

Medicinal Plants for Treatment of Prevalent Diseases
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.82049
5.3 Parietaria judaica
P. judaica commonly known as pellitory of wall from family Urticaceae has been
valued for its use as a diuretic, balm for wounds and burns and also as a soother for
chronic cough in herbal medicine [69]. The micro-broth dilution method was used
to study the inhibitory activity of aqueous extract of P. Judaica. The extract was able
to inhibit multidrug resistant S. pneumonia at an MIC value of 3.125 mg/mL [67].
5.4 Urtica urens
U. urens commonly known as dwarf nettle or annual nettle from family
Urticaceae is used medicinally for the treatment of pulmonary diseases [70]. A
study by Saleh Fares et al. [67] on the inhibitory activity of the aqueous extract
of this plant against multidrug resistant clinical isolates of S. pneumoniae, using
micro-broth dilution method, gave an MIC of 6.25 mg/mL. This illustrates its
potential to be used as medicine in the treatment pneumonia caused by multidrug
resistant S. pneumoniae.
5.5 Beta vulgaris
B. vulgaris popularly known as sugar beet from family Amaranthaceae is a
sugar producing plant. Sugar-producing plants contain bioactive compounds,
which are active against microbes and hence are able to protect the sugar from
fermenting or from undergoing any alteration [71]. The study of the antimicrobial
activity of the crude ethanolic leaf (lamina and midrib) extracts as well as frac-
tions (n-hexane and chloroform) against K. pneumonia, showed zones of growth
inhibition at different concentrations tested. At 1 mg/12 μL, the lamina and midrib
crude extracts recorded 19 and 9 mm inhibition zone. The chloroform lamina
and midrib fraction recorded 12 and 14 mm at concentration 1 mg/6 μL, while at
concentration 1 mg/12 μL, their inhibition zones were 15 and 20 mm, respectively.
Also the n-hexane lamina and midrib fractions had 20 and 16 mm inhibition zones
(1 mg/6 μL),while 36 and 32 mm zones of inhibition (1 mg/12 μL) were recorded,
respectively [72].
6. Medicinal plants with demonstrated anti-asthmatic activity
Asthma is a complex inflammatory disease and congestive respiratory disorder
brought about by airway narrowing. It symptoms may include episodic wheez-
ing, cough and chest tightness resulting in airflow block. It leads to changes in the
levels of eosinophils, mast cells, lymphocytes, cytokines and other inflammatory
cell products. There is increased prevalence worldwide especially in industrialized
countries and among children with increased morbidity and mortality rate [73, 74].
Medicinal plants have been screened for properties that enhance their activity as
anti-asthmatic agents, since current medications have adverse side effects. Few of
such plants with demonstrated activity are reviewed below.
6.1 Curcuma longa
C. longa L. is a rhizomatous herbaceous perennial flowering plant of the ginger
family, Zingiberaceae. It is native to the Indian subcontinent and Southeast Asia,
and requires temperatures between 20 and 30°C and a considerable amount of
annual rainfall to thrive. Methanolic extracts (curcumin-II at 200 mg/kg and
11

## Page 13

Pharmacognosy - Medicinal Plants
curcumin-I at 100 mg/kg) of the finger rhizomes of C. longa reduced significantly
(P < 0.01) estimated white blood cells count in ovalbumin (OVA) sensitized
Wistar rat models for both long and short term. At a higher dosage, curcumin-II
(200 mg/kg) tends to protect intact mast cells from degranulation [3]. This sug-
gests that curcumin can be used as complementary medicine in the treatment of
Asthma.
6.2 Aerva lanata
A. lanata (L.) A. L. Juss. ex Schult (Amaranthaceae) is a perennial herb,
frequently becoming more or less woody at the base. The stems can be erect to
prostrate, sometimes scrambling or climbing into other plants for support. It is
widespread in the tropics and subtropics of Africa through Asia to the Philippines
and New Guinea. It is used traditionally for treating cough, sore throat, indiges-
tion, wounds, and diabetics and as a vermifuge for children [75]. The ethanol
extract of aerial parts of A. lanata at 100 μg/mL significantly (***p < 0.01) exhib-
ited percentage decreased contraction in the isolated goat tracheal chain prepara-
tion model. Also in clonidine induced mast cell degranulation, the extract at 30 and
60 mg/kg administered orally, showed percentage protection of 64.2 and 68.9%,
respectively [76].
6.3 Cynodon dactylon
C. dactylon (L.) Pers, of the family Poaceae is a short-lived, prostrate, perennial
grass. It is widely naturalized in the temperate to tropical zones of Europe, Africa,
Asia, the Pacific and the Americas. Its habitat is along roadsides and in exposed
rocky or sandy sites. It use in traditional medicine to stop bleeding in minor inju-
ries, for weak vision and eye disorders, piles, asthma, tumors among others [77].
The findings of Savali et al. [78], indicated that isolated C. dactylon compound was
potent and has significant (p < 0.01 and p < 0.001) inhibitory effect on compound
48/80 induced anaphylactic reaction and mast cell activation. Also, compound
48/80 induced increased level of nitric oxide in rat serum and rat peritoneal mast
cells were significantly inhibited.
6.4 Piper betle
P. betle L. (Piperaceae) commonly referred to as Betel pepper, is an evergreen
climbing shrub producing woody stems, 5–20 m long, and distributed in Southeast
Asia—probably originally from Malaysia. It is traditionally used to cure cough,
cold, pruritis, asthma and rheumatism [79]. Ethanol and aqueous extract of leaves
at doses 100 and 200 mg/kg possesses anti-asthmatic activity on histamine induced
bronchoconstriction in guinea pig and histamine induced dose dependent contrac-
tion of guinea pig tracheal chain [80].
6.5 Lepidium sativum
L. sativum L. (Brassicaceae) also referred to as Garden cress is a profusely-
branched, erect, annual plant growing up to 80 cm tall [81]. It commonly grown in
many regions of Saudi Arabia and the Eastern Province. The seeds are used to cure
bronchitis, asthma, cough, and useful as abortifacient, antibacterial, aphrodisiac,
diuretic, expectorant, gastrointestinal stimulant, gastroprotective, laxative and
12

## Page 14

Medicinal Plants for Treatment of Prevalent Diseases
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.82049
stomachic [82]. The bronchodilatory effect of ethanolic seed extract and ethyl
acetate, n-butanol and methanol fractions, against histamine and acetylcholine
induced acute bronchospasm in guinea pigs, exhibited significant inhibition of
bronchospasm, with n-butanol fraction showing a significant (p < 0.001) protec-
tion comparable to the reference standards used in the study [83]. Rehman et al.
[84] also confirmed the bronchodilatory effect of L. sativum crude extract by inves-
tigating the various pathways for its activity in airway disorders. It was revealed
that, the extract’s activity was mediated through a combination of anticholinergic,
Ca++ antagonist and phosphodiesterase inhibitory pathways.
6.6 Curculigo orchioides
C. orchioides Gaertn. (Hypoxidaceae) is a stemless evergreen perennial herb
producing a cluster of leaves from the roots and spreading to form a clump. It
grows up to 50 cm tall. It ranges from East Asia—South China, Japan, Indian sub-
continent, Myanmar, Thailand, Cambodia, Laos, Vietnam, Malaysia, Indonesia,
Philippines, New Guinea, W. Pacific. Alcoholic extract of C. orchioides rhizomes
at doses (100–400 mg/kg) shows mast cell stabilizing and antihistaminic activity
on Compound 48/80-induced mast cell degranulation and systemic anaphylaxis
[85]. Also Pandit et al. [86] established the usefulness of the ethanol extract in
treating asthma, as it was reported to exhibit significant relaxant effect (p < 0.01)
at concentrations 100 and 25 μg/mL in isolated goat tracheal chain and isolated
guinea pig ileum preparations respectively. In an in vivo study using histamine
induced bronchoconstriction in guinea pigs, egg albumin induced passive paw
anaphylaxis in rats and haloperidol-induced catalepsy in mice, there was signifi-
cant (p < 0.01) protection at lower doses. Again, maximum increase in leucocytes
and lymphocytes (99%) and maximum decrease in eosinophils up to 0% at dose
375 mg/kg p.o. was reported in milk-induced total leukocytes and differential
leukocyte counts.
6.7 Casuarina equisetifolia
C. equisetifolia L. (Casuarinaceae) also commonly known as Common Ru, is
an evergreen tree with a finely branched, feathery crown usually growing from
6 to 35 m and 20–100 cm in diameter. The tree is widely planted throughout the
tropics, and ranges from East Asia to Bangladesh, Myanmar, Thailand, Vietnam,
Malaysia, Indonesia, Philippines, Australia and the Pacific [87]. The methanol
extract of wood and bark (10–80 mcg/mL) exhibited a significant dose depen-
dent (p < 0.05) antihistaminic activity by inhibiting the histamine induced
contraction of trachea. The wood extract (100 mg/kg, i.p.) significantly reduced
clonidine induced catalepsy (p < 0.05) and mast cell degranulation (p < 0.001)
[88].
7. Conclusion
All the plants reviewed exhibited potent activity confirming their various tradi-
tional uses and their ability to treat prevalent diseases. There is therefore the need to
subject these plants to further studies, by isolating active compounds which can be
processed into new and potent medicines and the need to study their mechanisms
of action.
13

## Page 15

Pharmacognosy - Medicinal Plants
Author details
Susana Oteng Mintah1*, Tonny Asafo-Agyei2, Mary-Ann Archer3,
Peter Atta-Adjei Junior2, Daniel Boamah1, Doris Kumadoh6, Alfred Appiah4,
Augustine Ocloo4, Yaw Duah Boakye5 and Christian Agyare5
1 Department of Microbiology, Center for Plant Medicine Research,
Akuapem-Mampong, Ghana
2 Plant Development Department, Center for Plant Medicine Research,
Akuapem-Mampong, Ghana
3 Department of Pharmaceutics, Center for Plant Medicine Research,
Akuapem-Mampong, Ghana
4 Center for Plant Medicine Research, Akuapem-Mampong, Ghana
5 Department of Pharmaceutics, Faculty of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, Kumasi, Ghana
6 Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, Kumasi, Ghana
*Address all correspondence to: somintah@cpmr.org.gh
© 2019 The Author(s). Licensee IntechOpen. This chapter is distributed under the terms
of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/3.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium,
provided the original work is properly cited.
14

### Table 1 (Page 15)

|  |  |
| --- | --- |

## Page 16

Medicinal Plants for Treatment of Prevalent Diseases
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.82049
References
[1] Shrestha PM, Dhillion SS. Medicinal [9] Chiyaka C, Garira W, Dube S. Effects
plant diversity and use in the highlands of treatment and drug resistance on the
of Dolakha district, Nepal. Journal of transmission dynamics of malaria in
Ethnopharmacology. 2003;86(1):81-96 endemic areas. Theoretical Population
Biology. 2009;75(1):14-29
[2] Asase A, Kokubun T, Grayer RJ, Kite
G, Simmonds MSJ, Oteng-Yeboah AA, [10] Ameyaw Y. Morpho-histological
et al. Chemical constituents and characters for the identification of
antimicrobial activity of medicinal Cryptolepis sanguinolenta (Lindl.) Schtr.
plants from Ghana: Cassia sieberiana, International Journal ofScience and
Haematostaphis barteri, Mitragyna inermis Nature. 2012;3(2):331-339
and Pseudocedrela kotschyi. Phytotherapy
Research. 2008;22(8):1013-1016 [11] Irvine FR. Woody plants of Ghana.
In: Woody Plants of Ghana. England,
[3] Sarkar S, Zaidi S, Chaturvedi AK, UK: Oxford University Press; 1961
Srivastava R, Dwivedi PK, Shukla R.
[12] Boye GL, Ampofo O. Proceedings of
Search for a herbal medicine: Anti-
the First International Symposium on
asthmatic activity of methanolic
Cryptolepine. Kumasi, Ghana: University
extract of Curcuma longa. Journal of
of Science and Technology; 1983
Pharmacognosy and Phytochemistry.
2015;3:59-72
[13] Wright CW, Phillipson JD, Awe SO,
Kirby GC, Warhurst DC, Quetin-
[4] Fischer PR, Bialek R. Prevention of
Leclercq J, et al. Antimalarial activity
malaria in children. Clinical Infectious
of cryptolepine and some other
Diseases. 2002;34(4):493-498
anhydronium bases. Phytotherapy
Research. 1996;10(4):361-363
[5] WHO. World Malaria Report
2014. Washington, DC: World Health
[14] Paulo A, Gomes ET, Steele J,
Organization; 2015
Warhurst DC, Houghton PJ.
Antiplasmodial activity of Cryptolepis
[6] Tabuti JRS. Herbal medicines
sanguinolenta alkaloids from
used in the treatment of malaria
leaves and roots. Planta Medica.
in Budiope county, Uganda.
2000;66(01):30-34
Journal of Ethnopharmacology.
2008;116(1):33-42
[15] Bugyei KA, Boye GL, Addy ME.
Clinical efficacy of a tea-bag
[7] Zirihi GN, Mambu L, Guédé-
formulation of Cryptolepis sanguinolenta
Guina F, Bodo B, Grellier P. In
root in the treatment of acute
vitro antiplasmodial activity and
uncomplicated falciparum malaria.
cytotoxicity of 33 West African
Ghana Medical Journal. 2010;44(1):3-9
plants used for treatment of malaria.
Journal of Ethnopharmacology.
[16] Burkill HM. The Useful Plants of
2005;98(3):281-285
West Tropical Africa. 2nd ed. Vol. 1.
Kew: Royal Botanic Gardens; 1985
[8] Basco LK, Mitaku S, Skaltsounis A-L,
Ravelomanantsoa N, Tillequin F, [17] Oliver-Bever BEP. Medicinal Plants
Koch M, et al. In vitro activities in Tropical West Africa. England:
of furoquinoline and acridone Cambridge University Press; 1986
alkaloids against Plasmodium
falciparum. Antimicrobial Agents and [18] Agyare C, Asase A, Lechtenberg M,
Chemotherapy. 1994;38(5):1169-1171 Niehues M, Deters A, Hensel A. An
15

## Page 17

Pharmacognosy - Medicinal Plants
ethnopharmacological survey Journal of Basic and Clinical Physiology
and in vitro confirmation of and Pharmacology. 2010;21(1):93-105
ethnopharmacological use of medicinal
plants used for wound healing in [26] Bagavan A, Rahuman AA,
Bosomtwi-Atwima-Kwanwoma area, Kaushik NK, Sahal D. In vitro
Ghana. Journal of Ethnopharmacology. antimalarial activity of medicinal
2009;125(3):393-403 plant extracts against Plasmodium
falciparum. Parasitology Research.
[19] Komlaga G, Cojean S, Dickson RA, 2011;108(1):15-22
Beniddir MA, Suyyagh-Albouz S,
Mensah MLK, et al. Antiplasmodial [27] Mittal M, Gupta N, Parashar P,
activity of selected medicinal Mehra V, Khatri M. Phytochemical
plants used to treat malaria in evaluation and pharmacological
Ghana. Parasitology Research. activity of Syzygium aromaticum: A
2016;115(8):3185-3195 comprehensive review. International
Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical
[20] Annan K, Sarpong K, Asare C, Sciences. 2014;6(8):67-72
Dickson R, Amponsah KI, Gyan B,
et al. In vitro anti-plasmodial activity [28] Ichino C, Soonthornchareonnon N,
of three herbal remedies for malaria Chuakul W, Kiyohara H, Ishiyama A,
in Ghana: Adenia cissampeloides Sekiguchi H, et al. Screening of Thai
(Planch.) Harms., Termina liaivorensis medicinal plant extracts and their active
A. Chev, and Elaeis guineensis constituents for in vitro antimalarial
Jacq. Pharmacognosy Research. activity. Phytotherapy Research.
2012;4(4):225 2006;20(4):307-309
[21] Henson IE. A brief history of the [29] Sleumer HO. Flora neotropica:
oil palm. In: Palm Oil. Amsterdam,
Monograph number 22. Flacourtiaceae.
Netherlands: Elsevier; 2012. pp. 1-29
New York New York Bot Gard Organ
Flora Neotrop 499p Illus, maps, keys.
[22] Mshana NR. Traditional Medicine
Icones, Maps Geog. 1980;4
and Pharmacopoeia: Contribution to
the Revision of Ethnobotanical and
[30] De Mesquita ML, Grellier P,
Floristic Studies in Ghana. Accra,
Mambu L, De Paula JE, Espindola LS. In
Ghana: Organization of African Unity/
vitro antiplasmodial activity of Brazilian
Scientific, Technical & Research
Cerrado plants used as traditional
Commission; 2000. 920 p
remedies. Journal of Ethnopharmacology.
2007;110(1):165-170
[23] Calixto JB, Santos ARS, Filho VC,
Yunes RA. A review of the plants of the
[31] Lorenzi H. Brazilian trees. Vol. 2.
genus Phyllanthus: Their chemistry,
Brazil: Instituto plantarum de estudos da
pharmacology, and therapeutic
flora; 2002
potential. Medicinal Research Reviews.
1998;18(4):225-258
[32] Luchi AE. Fibre pits in wood
of Xylopia emarginata Mart.
[24] Gaire BP, Subedi L. Phytochemistry,
(Annonaceae), Reserva Biológica e
pharmacology and medicinal properties
Estação Ecológica de Mogi-Guaçu,
of Phyllanthus emblica Linn. Chinese
São Paulo State, Brazil. Hoehnea.
Journal of Integrative Medicine. 2014:1-8.
2016;43(3):517-520
DOI: 10.1007/s11655-014-1984-2
[25] Mirunalini S, Krishnaveni M. [33] Fern K, Fern A, Morris R. Useful
Therapeutic potential of Phyllanthus tropical plants database. Recuper http//
emblica (amla): The ayurvedic wonder. tropical theferns info. 2014
16

## Page 18

Medicinal Plants for Treatment of Prevalent Diseases
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.82049
[34] Porter AH. Neem: India’s Tree of [43] Muthuswamy R, Senthamarai R.
Life. BBC News; 2006. p. 17 Anatomical investigation of flower
of Butea monosperma lam. Ancient
[35] El Tahir A, Satti GMH, Khalid SA. Science of Life. 2014;34(2):73
Antiplasmodial activity of
selected Sudanese medicinal [44] Hyde MA, Wursten BT, Ballings P,
plants with emphasis on Maytenus Palgrave CM. Flora of Zimbabwe:
senegalensis (Lam.) Exell. Species information. Cardiospermum
Journal of Ethnopharmacology. halicacabum. 2011
1999;64(3):227-233
[45] Payne A, Mukhopadhyay AK, Deka
S, Saikia L, Nandi SP. Anti-vibrio and
[36] Da Silva G, Serrano R, Silva O.
antioxidant properties of two weeds:
Maytenus heterophylla and Maytenus
Euphorbia serpens and Amaranthus
senegalensis, two traditional herbal
viridis. Research Journal of Medicinal
medicines. Journal of Natural Science,
Plant. 2015;9:170-178
Biology and Medicine. 2011;2(1):59
[46] US Department of Agriculture
[37] Finkelstein RA. Cholera, Vibrio
NRCS. The Plants Database.
Cholerae O1 and O139, and Other
Greensboro, NC, USA: National Plant
Pathogenic Vibrios, Chapter 24. Univ
Data Team; 2012
Texas Med Branch; 1996
[47] Sánchez E, García S, Heredia N.
[38] Wu Z, Raven PH, Hong D. Flora Extracts of edible and medicinal
of China. Volume 5: Ulmaceae through plants damage membranes of Vibrio
Basellaceae. Beijing, and Missouri cholerae. Applied and Environmental
Botanical Garden Press, St. Louis: Microbiology. 2010;76(20):6888-6894
Science Press; 2003
[48] Turner BL. The comps of Mexico:
[39] Acharyya S, Patra A, Bag PK. A systematic account of the family
Evaluation of the antimicrobial activity Asteraceae (chapter 8: Liabeae and
of some medicinal plants against enteric Vernonieae). Phytologia Memoirs.
bacteria with particular reference to 2007;12:1-144
multi-drug resistant Vibrio cholerae.
[49] Chevallier A. The Encyclopaedia of
Tropical Journal of Pharmaceutical
Medicinal Plants—A Practical Reference
Research. 2009;8(3):231-237
Guide to over 550 Key Herbs and their
Medicinal Uses. London: DK Publishing;
[40] Govaerts RHA, Faden RB. World
1996
Checklist of Selected Plant Families.
Kew: Royal Botanic Gardens; 2013
[50] Wiersema JH. Taxonomic information
on cultivated plants in the USDA/
[41] Sharma A, Patel VK, Chaturvedi
ARS germplasm resources information
AN. Vibriocidal activity of certain
network (GRIN). In: II International
medicinal plants used in Indian
Symposium on Taxonomy of Cultivated
folklore medicine by tribals of
Plants 413. 1994. pp. 109-116
Mahakoshal region of Central India.
Indian Journal of Pharmacology.
[51] Warrier PK, Nambiar VPK. Indian
2009;41(3):129
Medicinal Plants: A Compendium of 500
Species. Vol. 5. Telangana, India: Orient
[42] Srivastava GN, Bagchi GD, Blackswan; 1993
Srivastava AK. Pharmacognosy of
Ashoka stem bark and its adulterants. [52] WHO. Tuberculosis Fact sheet N 104.
International Journal of Crude Drug 2015. Avaialble at: http://www.who.int/
Research. 1988;26(2):65-72 mediacentre/factsheets/fs104/en. 2015
17

## Page 19

Pharmacognosy - Medicinal Plants
[53] Van Soolingen D, Hoogenboezem T, used medicinal plants of South India.
De Haas PEW, Hermans PWM, Koedam Journal of Medicinal Plants Research.
MA, Teppema KS, et al. A novel 2011;5(31):6881-6884
pathogenic taxon of the Mycobacterium
tuberculosis complex, Canetti: [62] Gupta R, Thakur B, Singh P, Singh
Characterization of an exceptional HB, Sharma VD, Katoch VM, et al.
isolate from Africa. International Anti-tuberculosis activity of selected
Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary medicinal plants against multi-drug
Microbiology. 1997;47(4):1236-1245 resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis
isolates. The Indian Journal of Medical
[54] Mann A, Amupitan JO, Research. 2010;131(6):809
Oyewale AO, Okogun JI, Ibrahim K. An
ethnobotanical survey of indigenous [63] Kuete V. Other health benefits of
flora for treating tuberculosis and other African medicinal spices and vegetables.
respiratory diseases in Niger State, In: Medicinal Spices and Vegetables
Nigeria. Journal of Phytomedicine and from Africa. England: Elsevier; 2017.
Therapeutics. 2007;12(1):1-21 pp. 329-349
[55] Mann A, Amupitan JO, Oyewale AO, [64] van der Poll T, Opal SM.
Okogun JI, Ibrahim K, Oladosu P, et al. Pathogenesis, treatment, and prevention
Evaluation of in vitro antimycobacterial of pneumococcal pneumonia. Lancet.
activity of Nigerian plants used for 2009;374(9700):1543-1556
treatment of respiratory diseases.
[65] File TM Jr. Community-acquired
African Journal of Biotechnology.
pneumonia. Lancet. 2003;362(9400):
2008;7(11):1630-1636
1991-2001
[56] Manandhar NP. Plants and People of
[66] Hymete A, Iversen T-H, Rohloff J,
Nepal. Portland, Oregon: Timber Press;
Erko B. Screening of Echinops ellenbeckii
2002
and Echinops longisetus for biological
[57] Nguta JM, Appiah-Opong R, activities and chemical constituents.
Nyarko AK, Yeboah-Manu D, Addo Phytomedicine. 2005;12(9):675-679
PGA, Otchere I, et al. Antimycobacterial
and cytotoxic activity of selected [67] Saleh Fares GO, Abdallah L, Almasri
M, Slaileh A, Zurba Z. Antibacterial
medicinal plant extracts. Journal of
activity of selected Palestinian wild
Ethnopharmacology. 2016;182:10-15
plant extracts against multidrug-
[58] Mativandlela SPN, Meyer JJM, resistant clinical isolate of Streptococcus
Hussein AA, Houghton PJ, Hamilton CJ, pneumoniae. Journal of Pharmacy
Lall N. Activity against Mycobacterium Research. 2013;1(10):963-969
smegmatis and M. tuberculosis by
extract of South African medicinal [68] Turker AU, Camper ND. Biological
plants. Phytotherapy Research. activity of common mullein, a medicinal
2008;22(6):841-845 plant. Journal of Ethnopharmacology.
2002;82(2-3):117-125
[59] Block E. Garlic and other alliums: The
lore and the science. Cambridge: Royal [69] Giachetti D, Taddei E, Taddei I.
Society of Chemistry; 2010. pp. 454 Diuretic and uricosuric activity
of Parietaria judaica L. Bollettino
[60] Tattelman E. Health effects of della Società Italiana di Biologia
garlic. American Family Physician. Sperimentale. 1986;62(2):197
2005;72(1):103-106
[70] Ozkarsli M, Sevim H, Sen A. In vivo
[61] Sivakumar A, Jayaraman G. Anti- effects of Urtica urens (dwarf nettle) on
tuberculosis activity of commonly the expression of CYP1A in control and
18

## Page 20

Medicinal Plants for Treatment of Prevalent Diseases
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.82049
3-methylcholanthrene-exposed rats. [80] Jawale NM, Shewale AB,
Xenobiotica. 2008;38(1):48-61 Nerkar GS, Patil VR. Evalution of
antihistaminic activity of leaves
[71] Srivastava R, Kulshreshtha DK. of Piper betel Linn. Pharmacology.
Bioactive polysaccharides from plants. 2009;3:966-977
Phytochemistry. 1989;28(11):2877-2883
[81] Facciola S. Cornucopia: A Source
[72] Hussain Z, Mohammad P, Book of Edible Plants. Vista, California:
Sadozai SK, Khan KM, Nawaz Y, Kampong Publications; 1990
Perveen S. Extraction of anti-
pneumonia fractions from the leaves [82] Duke JA. Handbook of Medicinal
of sugar beets Beta vulgaris. Journal of Herbs. Boca Raton, Florida: CRC Press;
Pharmacy Research. 2011;4(12):4783 2002
[73] Masoli M, Fabian D, Holt S, [83] Mali R, Mahajan S, Mehta A.
Beasley R. Program GI for A (GINA). Studies on bronchodilatory effect of
The global burden of asthma: Executive Lepidium sativum against allergen
summary of the GINA dissemination induced bronchospasm in Guinea
committee report. Allergy. pigs. Pharmacognosy Magazine.
2004;59(5):469-478 2008;4(15):189
[84] Rehman N, Khan A, Alkharfy KM,
[74] Braman SS. The global burden of
Gilani A-H. Pharmacological basis for
asthma. Chest. 2006;130(1):4S-12S
the medicinal use of Lepidium sativum
in airways disorders. Evidence-Based
[75] Umaramani M, Sivakanesan R.
Complementary and Alternative
Vitamin C content of commonly
Medicine. 2012;2012:8
eaten green leafy vegetables in
fresh and under different storage
[85] Venkatesh P, Mukherjee PK,
conditions. Tropical Plant Research.
Nema NK, Bandyopadhyay A, Fukui H,
2015;2(3):240-245
Mizuguchi H. Mast cell stabilization
and antihistaminic potentials of
[76] Kumar D, Prasad DN, Parkash J,
Curculigo orchioides rhizomes.
Bhatnagar SP, Kumar D. Antiasthmatic
Journal of Ethnopharmacology.
activity of ethanolic extract of Aerva
2009;126(3):434-436
lanata Linn. Pharmacology Online.
2009;2:1075-1081
[86] Pandit P, Singh A, Bafna AR,
Kadam PV, Patil MJ. Evaluation of
[77] Nandkarni AK. Indian Materia
antiasthmatic activity of Curculigo
Medica. Vol I & II (Reprinted). Bombay:
orchioides Gaertn. Rhizomes. Indian
Popular Prakashan; 1982
Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences.
2008;70(4):440
[78] Savali AS, Biradar PR, Jirankali MC.
Antianaphylactic and mast cell [87] Jensen M. Trees Commonly
stabilization activity of Cynodon Cultivated in Southeast Asia: An
dactylon. International Journal of Illustrated Field Guide. Vol. 38.
Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences. Bangkok, Thailand: RAP Publ.; 1995.
2010;2(2):69-73 p. 93
[79] Pradhan D, Suri KA, Pradhan [88] Aher AN, Pal SC, Patil UK,
DK, Biswasroy P. Golden heart of Yadav SK, Bhattacharya S. Evaluation
the nature: Piper betle L. Journal of of anthistaminic activity of Casuarina
Pharmacognosy and Phytochemistry. equisetifolia frost (Casuarinaceae).
2013;1(6):147-167 Pharmacology. 2009;1:1144-1149
19

