## Page 1

G.DiGiovanni,V.DiMatteo&E.Esposito(Eds.)
ProgressinBrainResearch,Vol.172
ISSN0079-6123
Copyrightr2008ElsevierB.V.Allrightsreserved
CHAPTER19
Dopamine/serotonin releasers as medications
for stimulant addictions
Richard B. Rothman1,(cid:2) , Bruce E. Blough2 and Michael H. Baumann1
1Clinical Psychopharmacology Section, IntramuralResearch Program, NationalInstitute onDrug Abuse,
NationalInstitutes of Health,DHHS, Baltimore, MD, USA
2Chemistry andLife Sciences Group,Research Triangle Institute International, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA
Abstract: The use of ‘agonist therapy’ for cocaine and methamphetamine addiction involves administra-
tionofstimulant-likemedications(e.g.monoaminereleasers)toreducewithdrawalsymptomsandprevent
relapse.Asignificantproblemwiththisstrategyisthatmanycandidatemedicationspossessabuseliability
due to activation of mesolimbic dopamine (DA) neurons in the brain. One way to reduce DA-mediated
abuse liability of candidate drugs might be to add in serotonin (5-HT)-releasing properties, since
substantial evidence shows that 5-HT neurons provide an inhibitory influence over mesolimbic DA
neurons. This chapter addresses several key issues related to the development of dual DA/5-HT releasers
for the treatment of substance use disorders. First, we briefly summarize the evidence supporting a dual
deficit in DA and 5-HT function during withdrawal from chronic cocaine or alcohol abuse. Second, we
discuss data demonstrating that 5-HT release can dampen DA-mediated stimulant effects, and the ‘anti-
stimulant’ role of 5-HT receptors is considered. Next, the mechanisms underlying potential adverse
2C
effects of 5-HT releasers are described. Finally, we discuss recently published data with PAL-287, a novel
non-amphetamine DA/5-HT-releasing agent that suppresses cocaine self-administration but lacks positive
reinforcingproperties.ItisconcludedthatDA/5-HTreleaserscouldbeusefultherapeuticadjunctsforthe
treatmentofcocaineandalcoholaddictionsaswellasforobesity,attentiondeficitdisorderanddepression.
Keywords: alcohol; amphetamine; cocaine; dopamine; serotonin; treatment; transporter
Introduction Baumann, 2003; Rothman et al., 2005; Wee et al.,
2005).Asecondarygoalistointegrateourfindings
Amaingoalofthischapteristoreviewdatafrom withtheexistingliteraturetoprovideaconceptual
our laboratory pertaining to the development of framework for the design of new medications for
dualdopamine(DA)/serotonin(5-HT)releasersas addiction disorders. Within the context of this
medications for stimulant addiction and possibly chapter, the term ‘stimulant’ refers to drugs such
alcoholaddiction(Reaetal.,1998;Wojnickietal., as cocaine and amphetamines that produce a
1999; Baumann et al., 2000, 2001; Rothman and spectrum of effects in humans, including cardio-
vascular stimulation, mood elevation and a
decreased need for sleep. At high doses, or after
(cid:2) longerperiodsofuse,stimulantscancausearange
Correspondingauthor.Tel.:+(410)550-1598;
Fax:+(410)550-2997;E-mail:rrothman@mail.nih.gov ofadverseeffects,suchasdisorderedthoughtsand
DOI:10.1016/S0079-6123(08)00919-9 385

## Page 2

386
psychotic episodes. In laboratory animals, stimu- distinct transporter proteins are expressed by each
lants increase locomotor activity and are readily type of monoamine neuron: NE transporters
self-administeredduetotheirpowerfulreinforcing (NET), DA transporters (DAT) and 5-HT trans-
properties.Figure1depictsthechemicalstructures porters (SERT) are associated with NE, DA and
of drugs mentioned in this chapter. Many of these 5-HT neurons, respectively. These proteins belong
drugsareusefulmedicationswithlonghistoriesof to a superfamily of Na+/Cl(cid:2)-dependent transpor-
efficacy and safety while others are highly addic- ters that share genetic, morphological and func-
tive substances associated with considerable mor- tionalhomologies(UhlandJohnson,1994;Torres
bidity and mortality (Musto, 1992; Das, 1993; and Amara, 2007). Under normal circumstances,
Anonymous, 1995; Gonzalez Castro et al., 2000). the transporter-mediated uptake of monoamine
In some cases, as with amphetamine itself, the transmitters is the principal mechanism for inacti-
samedrugcanbeatherapeuticentityoranabused vation of monoamine signalling in the brain.
substance, depending upon the context in which Consequently,drugsthatinteractwithmonoamine
thedrugisadministered(Arnsten,2006;Greenhill, transporters have profound effects on CNS func-
2006). tion, and these effects can be beneficial or
Most stimulant drugs interact with monoamine detrimental depending upon the dose, route and
neurons in the central nervous system (CNS). formulation of the drug administered (Amara and
Neurons that synthesize, store and release mono- Sonders, 1998; Iversen, 2006).
aminetransmitters—norepinephrine(NE), dopa- Drugs that target transporter proteins can be
mine (DA) and serotonin (5-HT) — are widely divided into two classes based on their precise
distributedinthemammalianCNS.Theseneurons mechanism of action:reuptake inhibitors and
expressspecializedplasmamembraneproteinsthat substrate-type releasers (Rothman and Baumann,
functiontotransportpreviouslyreleasedtransmit- 2003). Reuptake inhibitors bind to transporter
ter molecules from the extracellular space back proteins but are not transported. These drugs
into the cytoplasm (Amara and Kuhar, 1993; elevate extracellular transmitter concentrations by
Masson et al., 1999). It is well established that blocking transporter-mediated recapture of
NH2 NH
CH3
CH3 CH3
amphetamine methamphetamine
CH3 CH3 H
NH2 NH2 F3C N
CH2CH3
CH3 CH3 CH3
Cl
phentermine chlorphentermine fenfluramine
F NH2 NH2 NH 2
CH3 CH3 CH3
H3C
m-fluoroamphetamine p-methylamphetamine 1-naphthyl-2-aminopropane
(PAL-353) (PAL-313) (PAL-287)
Fig.1. Chemicalstructuresofstimulantsdiscussedinthischapter.

## Page 3

387
transmittermoleculesfromthesynapse.Substrate- Preclinicalandhumanresearchfindingsdemon-
type releasers bind to transporter proteins and are strate that withdrawal from stimulant and alcohol
subsequently transported into the cytoplasm of abuse is associated with deficits in DA and 5-HT
nerve terminals. Thus, transmitter ‘releasers’ are function. For example, rats withdrawn from
often referred to as transporter ‘substrates’. chronic cocaine or alcohol administration display
Releasers elevate extracellular transmitter concen- decreased levels of extracellular DA and 5-HT in
trations by a two-pronged mechanism: (1) they thenucleus accumbens (Parsons etal.,1991, 1995;
promote efflux of transmitter by a process of Rossetti et al., 1992; Weiss et al., 1996). Human
transporter-mediated exchange and (2) they brain imaging studies show that cocaine addicts
increase cytoplasmic levels of transmitter by havereductionsinevokedDAreleaseandalossof
disrupting storage of transmitters in vesicles via DA D receptors in the striatum (Volkow et al.,
2
interactions with the vesicular monoamine trans- 1997,2002,Martinezetal.,2007).Neuroendocrine
porter 2 (VMAT2) (Rudnick, 1997; Fleckenstein responsiveness to 5-HT releasers is diminished in
et al., 2007). The molecular mechanisms under- rats withdrawn from repeated cocaine injections
lying transporter-mediated transmitter release are (Levy et al., 1994; Baumann et al., 1995a), and
not completely understood, but ionic currents, similar findings have been reported in abstinent
oligomerization and reversal of normal transport humancocaineaddicts(Haneyetal.,2001;Ghitza
function appear to be involved (Sitte and et al., 2007). Taken together, these data suggest
Freissmuth, 2003; Blakely et al., 2005; Sulzer thatacardinalfeatureofwithdrawalfromchronic
et al., 2005). Because substrate-type releasing cocaine, and possibly alcohol, is decreased synap-
agents must be transported into nerve terminals ticlevelsofDAand5-HTincriticalbraincircuits.
topromotetransmitterrelease,reuptakeinhibitors Additional clinical support for the existence of
can block the effects of releasers. 5-HT deficits in cocaine addicts is the occurrence
of symptoms resembling major depression during
abstinence (Dackis and Gold, 1985; Gawin and
Kleber, 1986), coupled with an increased preva-
A dual deficit model of stimulant addiction lence of suicidal ideation and suicide attempts
(Garlow et al., 2003). The well-accepted impor-
The use of stimulants such as cocaine and tanceof5-HTdysfunctioninmediatingdepression
methamphetamine produces a ‘high’ or ‘rush’ that andsuicide(forreview,seeMann,2003)suggestsa
islikelymediatedbyelevationsinextracellularDA parallel role for decreased synaptic 5-HT in
levels in mesolimbic circuits (Volkow et al., 2002; cocaine and alcohol withdrawal states (Lesch,
Di Chiara et al., 2004), although some evidence 2005). Indeed, the spectrum of symptoms often
indicates that elevations in extracellular NE may reported by patients withdrawing from stimulant
also contribute (Rothman et al., 2001; Alexander or alcohol use — depressed mood, suicidal
et al., 2005). Similarly, alcohol-induced increases ideations, obsessive thoughts, intense craving,
in extracellular DA are thought to underlie the anhedonia,increasedimpulsivityandsusceptibility
positive reinforcing effects of this commonly to drug-related cues — presumably reflects long-
abused substance (Koob et al., 1998; Koob, term changes in brain function and structure. We
2003). Repeated misuse of stimulants, especially speculate that deficits in monoamine systems
when they areself-administered viathesmoked or underlie at least some of the symptoms experi-
intravenousroutes,canleadtoseriousaddictionin encedduringwithdrawal(forreview,seeBaumann
susceptible individuals. The chronic abuse of and Rothman, 1998b).
stimulants and alcohol, despite negative conse- In particular, we have proposed a dual deficit
quences, causes long-term changes in neurochemi- model of stimulant addiction in which drug-
stry and brain circuitry via processes of synaptic induced DA and 5-HT dysfunction contributes to
plasticity (Volkow and Li, 2004; Hyman, 2005; withdrawal symptoms, drug craving and relapse
Kalivas and O’Brien, 2008). (Baumann and Rothman, 1998a, b; Rothman

## Page 4

388
et al., 1998; Baumann et al., 2000). Depicted 1997;Halladayetal.,1999).Forinstance,acuteor
diagrammatically in Fig. 2, the dual deficit model chronic administration of low doses of DA
postulates that decreased synaptic DA during releasers, such as D-amphetamine, decreases
stimulant withdrawal underlies anhedonia and cocaine self-administration behaviour in rhesus
psychomotor retardation, whereas decreased monkeys (Glowa et al., 1995; Negus and Mello,
synaptic 5-HT gives rise to depressed mood, 2003a, b). The data in Fig. 3 demonstrate that the
obsessive thoughts and lack of impulse control. DA-releasing agent phentermine suppresses
Consistentwiththismodel,ratsreceivingrepeated responding forcocaineinjectionswithout affecting
injections of abused stimulants exhibit neurobio- food-reinforced behaviour, and this effect is main-
logicalchangessimilartothoseobservedinhuman tained by daily administration of phentermine
patients with major depression (Markou and (Wojnicki et al., 1999). Such preclinical results
Koob, 1991; Baumann et al., 1995a; Baumann provide a rationale for using DA releasers as
andRothman,1998a;Linetal.,1999).Ifabstinent medications for treating cocaine addiction
stimulant addicts exhibit DA and 5-HT deficits, (Rothman et al., 2002; Grabowski et al., 2004b;
medicationscapableofcorrectingabnormalitiesin Lile, 2006).
DA and 5-HT function might be effective in Under certain conditions, the 5-HT releaser
treating stimulant and alcohol dependence. fenfluramine decreases responding for cocaine in
In agreement with the dual deficit hypothesis, rhesus monkeys as well (Negus et al., 2007).
drugsthatreleaseDA(phentermine,amphetamine) Combined administration of phentermine plus
or 5-HT (fenfluramine) display properties consis- fenfluramine produces a 75% decrease in cocaine
tent with the effective treatment of substance use self-administration in monkeys (Glowa et al.,
disorders (Rothman et al., 1994, 1998; Yu et al., 1997). The mixture of phentermine and
DOPAMINE SEROTONIN
DEFICIT DEFICIT
Parkinson-like OCD-like
Symptoms Symptoms
-slow reaction time -obsessive thoughts
-anergia Depression -compulsive behaviors
&
Anhedonia Craving Impulsivity
-“pleasure center” -suicide/aggression
dysfunction -susceptibility to
“cue triggers”
-decreased synaptic DA -decreased synaptic 5-HT
-altered DA transporter function -decreased 5-HT cell activity
-postsynaptic receptor changes -postsynaptic receptor changes
Fig. 2. The dual deficit model of stimulant addiction. According to the model, withdrawal from chronic stimulant use leads to
decreasedsynapticavailabilityofDAand5-HT.Thisdualdeficitcontributestowithdrawalsymptoms,drugcravingandrelapse.DA
dysfunction underlies anhedonia and psychomotor disturbances, whereas 5-HT dysfunction causes depressed mood, obsessive
thoughtsandlackofimpulsecontrol.Protractedwithdrawalphenomenaarepostulatedtocontributesignificantlytorelapse.Adapted
withpermissionfromRothmanandBaumann(2003).

## Page 5

389
Fig.3. Acuteeffectsofphentermineonratesofrespondingmaintainedunderafixedratio(FR)30scheduleoffood(J)orcocaine
(&)reinforcement.Differentunitdosesofintravenouscocaine,10–100mg/kg/injection,areindicated.Phenterminewasadministered
intravenously. Effects on responding are mean7SEM, expressed as percentage of the individual control rates of responding for
N¼3–4monkeys.Controlvariability(filledsymbols)isexpressedastheaverageofindividualcoefficientsofvariation.Datataken
withpermissionfromWojnickietal.(1999).
D-fenfluraminereducescocaineself-administration that decrease stimulant abuse because of shared
by 80% in rats, yet this mixture is not self- neurochemical properties with the abused drugs
administered (Glatz et al., 2002). Importantly, (Gorelick, 1998). Accordingly, we have described
5-HT-releasing agents suppress cue-elicited agonist therapy as neurochemical ‘normalization’
cocaine-seeking behaviour in rats (Burmeister therapy —that is,thestimulantmedicationserves
et al., 2003) and decrease cocaine craving in to normalize neurochemical deficits caused by
cocaine-dependent human patients (Buydens- chronic exposure to the abused stimulant
Branchey et al., 1998). The collective findings (Rothman et al., 2002; Rothman and Baumann,
suggest that combined treatment with DA and 2003). Neurochemical normalization therapy has
5-HT releasers may have a greater therapeutic generated effective treatments for nicotine depen-
value than treatment with either drug alone, in dence (Henningfield, 1995; Rollema et al., 2007)
terms of decreasing stimulant self-administration and opioid dependence (Ling et al., 1994; White
and reducing cue-induced relapse. Moreover, a and Lopatko, 2007). This approach has been
growing body of evidence shows that DA/5-HT- explored for the treatment of cocaine dependence
releasing agents may provide similar therapeutic as well (Alim et al., 1995; Grabowski et al., 1997;
benefits for alcohol dependence (Yu et al., 1997; Kampman et al., 2000; Walsh et al., 2000), and a
Halladay et al., 1999, 2006). number of placebo-controlled trials have shown
promising results (Grabowski et al., 2001, 2004a;
Sheareretal.,2003).Asignificantlimitationofthis
5-HT release counteracts stimulant effects of DA strategy, however, is that candidate medications
release often exhibit inherent abuse liability due to
activation of mesolimbic DA neurons in the brain
The use of stimulant-like medications to treat (for review, see Grabowski et al., 2004b).
stimulant addictions is an approach known as One feasible means to decrease the abuse
‘agonist’ therapy. This strategy involves admini- liability of candidate medications is to add 5-HT-
stering medications that are less potent and less releasingpropertiestothesedrugs.Severallinesof
addictive than cocaine or methamphetamine, but evidence support the hypothesis that elevations in

## Page 6

390
synaptic 5-HT counteract the stimulant and 5-HTinvivo.SuchindirectDAagonistsarestrong
reinforcing effects mediated by elevations in locomotorstimulantsandsupportself-administra-
synaptic DA (Czoty et al., 2002; Daw et al., tion behaviour. Drugs that release [3H]5-HT more
2002; Higgins and Fletcher, 2003; Burmeister potently than [3H]DA in vitro (e.g. fenfluramine
etal.,2004).Administrationofthe5-HTprecursor andchlorphentermine)increaseendogenousextra-
L-tryptophan, which increases 5-HT synthesis and cellular 5-HT more than extracellular DA. Such
release in the CNS, decreases self-administration indirect 5-HT agonists produce minimal motor
of cocaine and amphetamine in rats (Smith et al., activity and do not support self-administration
1986; McGregor et al., 1993). Likewise, pretreat- behaviour. The anti-stimulant effect of 5-HT
ment with 5-HT reuptake inhibitors can reduce releasers is also seen in the conditioned place
intravenouscocaineself-administrationinratsand preference(CPP)assayasshowninFig.4,wherea
squirrelmonkeys(Carroll et al.,1990; Howell and low dose of fenfluramine greatly reduces the
Byrd, 1995). Cocaine analogues that have potent positive CPP induced by phentermine.
affinity at SERT support less self-administration The precise mechanisms responsible for anti-
behaviour than analogues with weak affinity for stimulant effects of 5-HT releasers have not been
SERT (Roberts et al., 1999; Howell et al., 2007). characterized, but increases in extracellular 5-HT
Consistentwiththesefindings,agentsthatbroadly would be expected to activate multiple 5-HT
activate brain 5-HT systems can reduce self- receptor subtypes known to modulate DA func-
administration of stimulants and other drugs of tion (Muller and Huston, 2006; Alex and Pehek,
abuse (Higgins and Fletcher, 2003). The ‘anti- 2007). As mentioned already, stimulant and
stimulant’ effects of increasing extracellular 5-HT reinforcing properties of drugs such as cocaine
are readily observed after combined administra- and methamphetamine are mediated via the
tion of 5-HT and DA releasers, or after admini- activation of mesolimbic DA neurons. Cell bodies
stration of single agents that release both of mesolimbic DA neurons reside in the midbrain
neurotransmitters. ventral tegmental area (VTA) and send axonal
As summarized in Table 1, drugs that release projectionstomanyregionsoftheforebrain,most
[3H]DAmorepotentlythan[3H]5-HTinvitro(e.g. notably the nucleus accumbens (Ungerstedt, 1971;
amphetamine and phentermine) increase endoge- Mooreand Bloom, 1978). The nucleus accumbens
nous extracellular DA more than extracellular is a critical limbic–motor interface receiving
Table1. Summaryofserotonergicanddopaminergiceffectsofselectedreleasingagents
Drug [3H]5-HT [3H]DA Peak%increasein Peak%increasein Self- Locomotor
release release dialysate5-HT(dose, dialysateDA(dose, admini- activation
EC (nM) EC (nM) mg/kg) mg/kg) stered
50 50
Amphetaminea 1756 8.0 45(0.3mg/kgi.p.) 224(0.3mg/kgi.p.) Yes Strong
Phenterminea 3511 262 32(1.0mg/kgi.p.) 156(1.0mg/kgi.p.) Yes Strong
PAL-353c 1937 24.2 170(1.0mg/kgi.v.) 432(1.0mg/kgi.v.) Yes Strong
Fenfluraminea 79.3 W10,000 215(1.0mg/kgi.p.) 20(1.0mg/kgi.p.) No None
Chlorphenterminea 30.9 2650 228(1.0mg/kgi.p.) 86(1.0mg/kgi.p.) No None
Phentermine+ N/A N/A 222(1.0+1.0mg/kgi.p.) 144(1.0+1.0mg/kg No Weak
fenfluraminea i.p.)
PAL-313c 53.4 44.1 544(1.0mg/kgi.v.) 130(1.0mg/kgi.v.) Weak Weak
PAL-287b 3.4 12.6 464(1.0mg/kgi.v.) 133(1.0mg/kgi.v.) No Weak
Asummaryofdataillustratingthetendencyforincreasingextracellular5-HTtoreducereinforcingandlocomotoreffectsmediatedbyincreasesin
extracellularDA.Microdialysisdataunpublished.ThistableoriginallyappearedinRothmanetal.(2007).
aFromBaumannetal.(2000)andRothmanetal.(2001).
bFromRothmanetal.(2005).
cFromWeeetal.(2005).

## Page 7

250
200
150
100
50
0
-50
afferent inputs from the prefrontal cortex, hippo- While most 5-HT receptor subtypes enhance DA
campus and amygdala, while sending efferent transmission (Muller and Huston, 2006; Alex and
outputs to the ventral pallidum and other regions Pehek, 2007), 5-HT receptors provide a strong
2C
known to modulate locomotor centres in the inhibitory influence on mesolimbic DA neurons
brainstem (Mogenson et al., 1980; Pennartz (Di Matteo et al., 2001; Bubar and Cunningham,
et al., 1994). 5-HT neurons in the midbrain raphe 2006).Forinstance,systemicadministrationofthe
nuclei send axonal projections that densely inner- 5-HT agonist Ro60-0175 markedlyinhibitsDA
2C
vatethemesolimbicsystemattheleveloftheVTA cell firing in the VTA and decreases extracellular
and the nucleus accumbens (Steinbusch, 1981; levels of DA in forebrain projection areas (Di
Molliver, 1987). Furthermore, 5-HT neurons Matteo et al., 1999, 2000; Gobert et al., 2000).
innervate various regions providing excitatory Pretreatment with Ro 60-0175 reduces locomotor
afferentstotheaccumbens(e.g.prefrontalcortex). activity and self-administration behaviour pro-
Inthismanner,5-HTnerveterminalsareuniquely duced by cocaine, whereas pretreatment with the
positioned to influence the activity of mesolimbic 5-HT antagonist SB 242084 has the opposite
2C
DA neurons at multiple levels. effect (Grottick et al., 2000; Fletcher et al., 2002).
The serotonergic modulation of DA function is In fact, SB 242084 when given alone increases
inherently complex due to the presence of at least burstfiringofDAcellsintheVTA,suggestingthat
14 different 5-HT receptor subtypes in the CNS 5-HT receptors provide tonic inhibition of
2C
(Barnes and Sharp, 1999; Hoyer et al., 2002). mesolimbic DA activity. Collectively, these
NEHP NEF NEF/NEHP
Fen (0.3 mg/kg) Eliminates PHEN (3 mg/kg)-Induced
Condition Place Preference
)ces(
erocS
gninoitidnoC
391
*
Fig.4. Effectsofphentermine(3mg/kg)andfenfluramine(0.3mg/kg),givenaloneorincombination,onconditionedplacepreference.
Conditioningscorerepresentsthemeandifferencebetweentime(s)spentinthedrugvs.vehicle-pairedsideofthetestchamber.All
(cid:2)
drugs were administered i.p. Each column represents the mean of N¼9–10 rats. ¼Significant place preference (Wilcoxon test,
Po0.05).DatatakenwithpermissionfromReaetal.(1998).

### Table 1 (Page 7)

| * |
| --- |
|  |

## Page 8

392
findings indicate a potential role for 5-HT Fenfluramine-associated VHD is characterized by
2C
receptors in mediating the anti-stimulant effects thickening of valve leaflets and increased regur-
of 5-HT releasers (Higgins and Fletcher, 2003). gitation of blood, most often detected by echo-
Recent data show that anti-stimulant effects of cardiography. While initial findings suggested
5-HT receptor activation involve at least two that fenfluramines induce VHD in a high percen-
2C
separatemechanisms—onemechanismintheVTA tage of patients, more recent evidence shows a
andanotherintheprefrontalcortex.Microinjection much smaller risk. For example, a meta-analysis
of Ro 60-0175 into the VTA blocks behavioural of available clinical data demonstrates that
effects of cocaine (Fletcher et al., 2004), perhaps the incidence of clinically significant valvular
reflectinginhibitionofDAcellfiringandreleaseas regurgitation was 12% in fenfluramine-treated
noted above (Di Matteo et al., 2001). Microinjec- patients vs. 6% in untreated controls (Sachdev
tion of Ro 60-0175 into the prefrontal cortex et al., 2002).
also markedly reduces cocaine-induced locomotor Becausefenfluraminesarepotent5-HTreleasers
activity (Filip and Cunningham, 2003), and this (Baumannetal.,2000;Rothmanetal.,2003a)and
action may involve suppression of excitatory 5-HT has established mitogenic effects (Nemecek
glutamate outputs to the nucleus accumbens (Liu et al., 1986; Seuwen et al., 1988), investigators
et al., 2007). Neuroanatomical evidence suggests initially speculated that serotonergic mechanisms
thattheeffectsof5-HT receptoractivationinthe might contribute to VHD (Connolly et al., 1997;
2C
VTAandcortexaremediatedbythestimulationof Connolly and McGoon, 1999). To this end, we
gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) interneurons carried out an investigation to determine whether
(Bubar and Cunningham, 2006, 2007; Liu et al., stereoisomers of fenfluramine, or the N-dealky-
2007); more research is needed to validate this lated metabolite norfenfluramine, might activate
proposal.Furtherinvestigationiswarrantedtofully mitogenic5-HTreceptors(Rothmanetal.,2000a).
elucidate the roleof5-HT receptorsinmediating A number of other test drugs were included in
2C
anti-stimulant effects of 5-HT releasers. Addition- these experiments as positive and negative
ally, the potential of 5-HT agonists as medica- controls. ‘Positive controls’ were ergot alkaloids
2C
tions for substance use disorders deserves to be known to increase the risk of VHD, such as
examined (Higgins and Fletcher, 2003; Bubar and methysergide, its active metabolite methylergono-
Cunningham, 2006). vine and ergotamine (Bana et al., 1974; Bredberg
et al., 1986; Hendrikx et al., 1996). ‘Negative
controls’ were drugs that interacted with
Potential adverse effects of 5-HT releasers monoamine transporters but did not cause VHD,
and these drugs included phentermine, fluoxetine
The clinical use of 5-HT-releasing agents as and its metabolite norfluoxetine. We also
medications has been associated with a number tested the antidepressant trazodone and its active
ofadverseeffects(Rothmanetal.,1999;Rothman metabolite m-chlorophenylpiperazine (mCPP) as
and Baumann, 2002; Zolkowska et al., 2006). negative controls (Ishida et al., 1995; Otani et al.,
Based primarily on experience with D,L-fenflura- 1997). mCPP has agonist activity at a wide
mine and its more potent isomer D-fenfluramine, range of 5-HT receptor subtypes (Hoyer et al.,
three potentially serious side effects need to be 1994, 2002) and is capable of releasing neuronal
considered when 5-HT releasers are developed as 5-HT via a transporter-mediated mechanism simi-
treatment agents: valvular heart disease (VHD), lartothatoffenfluramines(Baumannetal.,1993,
idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension 2001).
(IPAH) and neurotoxicity. Fenfluramines were Ourworkinghypothesiswasthatfenfluramines,
commonly prescribed anorectics until their norfenfluraminesandpositivecontroldrugswould
removal from the market in 1997 due to the share the ability to activate a mitogenic 5-HT
occurrence of VHD in some patients (Connolly receptor subtype expressed in heart valves, while
et al., 1997; Connolly and McGoon, 1999). the negative control drugs would not. An initial

## Page 9

393
receptorome screen led to a detailed evaluation of Interestingly, fenfluramines have low affinity for
the binding of these drugs to the 5-HT family all5-HT receptorsubtypes.Bycontrast,wefound
2 2
of receptors (Rothman et al., 2000a). Table 2 that norfenfluramines displayed high affinity and
reports binding data, and Table 3 reports the efficacy at the 5-HT receptor subtype (K ¼
2B I
functional effects of these compounds at cloned 10–50nM), consistent with the findings of others
human 5-HT , 5-HT and 5-HT receptors. (Porter et al., 1999; Fitzgerald et al., 2000).
2A 2B 2C
Table2. K valuesoftestdrugsat5-HT receptors
I 2
Drug Human
5-HT 5-HT 5-HT
2A 2B 2C
(7)-Fenfluramine 52167423 413471281 31837637
(+)-Fenfluramine 11,10772303 509971173 62457874
((cid:2))-Fenfluramine 54637600 571372285 34157922
(7)-Norfenfluramine 23167278 52.1721 557761
(+)-Norfenfluramine 15167150 11.277.3 324712
((cid:2))-Norfenfluramine 38417614 47.8730.6 814798
Ergotamine 9.071.0 3.070.4 1271.5
Methysergide 15.074.0 9.174.9 1.870.2
Methylergonovine 12.671.0 0.4970.16 12.471.0
Fluoxetine 299753 503071960 50710
Norfluoxetine 6387108 506371974 286760
Trazodone 19.872.4 73.6736 402744
mCPP 391747 3.271.0 59711
5-HT 614774 4.071.9 12.271.3
Phentermine W10,000 W10,000 W10,000
Valuesaremean7SDforn¼3experiments.DatatakenwithpermissionfromRothmanetal.(2000a).
Table3. Functionalactivityoftestdrugsat5-HT receptors
2
Drug Human5-HT Human5-HT Human5-HT
2A 2B 2C
K V K V K V (percent
act max act max act max
(nM7SD) (percentof (nM7SD) (percentof (nM7SD) of5-HT7SD)
5-HT7SD) 5-HT7SD)
(7)-Fenfluramine 413172448 1574 ND ND ND ND
(+)-Fenfluramine W10,000 ND 3797120 38714 3627109 80710
((cid:2))-Fenfluramine 52797998 4377.2 12487430 4775 3607155 84715
(+)-Norfenfluramine 6307240 8879 18.479 7376 1374 100711
((cid:2))-Norfenfluramine 15657323 9379 3577180 71715 1879 80717
Ergotamine 1674 7573 9.873 5673 573 75715
Methysergide 3.571.7 2473 150743 1874 2.971.5 3373.5
Methylergonovine 1.370.4 7077 0.870.5 4073 2.571.2 10377
Fluoxetine ND ND ND ND Antagonist K ¼6167172
I
Norfluoxetine ND ND ND ND Antagonist K ¼43717
I
Trazodone Antagonist Antagonist Antagonist
mCPP 65717 55711 64727 43714 0.6470.3 79715
5-HT 66726 100 2.471.5 100 0.670.18 100
Phentermine ND ND 13947450 66710
Valuesaremean7SDforn¼3experiments.DatatakenwithpermissionfromRothmanetal.(2000a).

## Page 10

394
Methysergide acts as a partial agonist at the bypulmonaryarterialvasoconstrictionandhyper-
5-HT receptor,whilethemetabolitemethylergo- plasia that leads to severe hypertension. The
2B
novine has even greater affinity and efficacy. pathogenesis of IPAH is complex and difficult to
Ergotamine is a potent partial agonist at the study, especially given the rarity of the disorder.
5-HT receptor. Among the negative control Nonetheless, evidence from our laboratory and
2B
drugs tested, only mCPP exhibits agonist activity others implicates the involvement of 5-HT and
atthe5-HT site.Itisnoteworthythattrazodone SERT proteins in the pathogenesis of IPAH
2B
binds to the 5-HT receptor with moderate (Rothman et al., 1999; MacLean et al., 2000;
2B
affinity but functions as an antagonist. Thus, Eddahibi et al., 2006). We demonstrated that the
when trazodone is metabolized to mCPP in vivo SERT substrate activity was a common feature of
(Ishidaetal.,1995;Otanietal.,1997),the5-HT drugsassociatedwithIPAH,butnotallsubstrates
2B
actionsofmCPPareprobablyblocked byantago- increased the risk of the disease (Rothman et al.,
nist actions of the parent compound. 1999). It is well established that blood platelets
Our results with the various positive control expressSERTproteinsidenticaltothoseexpressed
drugs strongly implicate the 5-HT receptor as a onneurons,andplateletSERTaccumulatesnearly
2B
major culprit in the development of drug-induced 99% of circulating 5-HT into platelet storage
VHD,andaccumulatingdatasupportthishypoth- (Ni and Watts, 2006). One hypothesis — the so-
esis (Porter et al., 1999; Fitzgerald et al., 2000; called ‘5-HT hypothesis’ — has been invoked as a
Setola and Roth, 2005; Roth, 2007). 5-HT potential mechanism underlying fenfluramine-
2B
receptors are abundantly expressed on aortic and induced IPAH (Fishman, 1999; MacLean et al.,
mitral valves (Fitzgerald et al., 2000), and these 2000). This hypothesis postulates that fenflura-
receptors are known to stimulate mitogenesis mines increase the risk of IPAH by stimulating
(Lopez-Ilasaca, 1998; Hafizi et al., 2000). Further SERT-mediated release of 5-HT from platelets,
evidence for the role of 5-HT receptors in drug- therebyelevatingplasmalevelsof5-HT.Persistent
2B
induced VHD is based on the effects of ergot elevations in plasma 5-HT would then cause
medications such as cabergoline and pergolide. pulmonary dysfunction. It is noteworthy that an
Both of these medications increase the risk of analogous 5-HT hypothesis has been invoked to
VHD in human patients and are also potent explain VHD, but as discussed already, drug-
5-HT receptor agonists (for review, see Roth, inducedactivationof5-HT receptorsseemstobe
2B 2B
2007). Setola et al. (2003) showed that the illicit the predominant mechanism involved in this
amphetamine analogue 3,4-methylenedioxy- disease.
methamphetamine (MDMA) and its N-demethy- A key prediction of the 5-HT hypothesis is that
lated metabolite, 3,4-methylenedioxyamphetamine fenfluramine increases plasma 5-HT to concentra-
(MDA),are5-HT receptoragonists.Thesedrugs tions sufficient to produce vasoconstriction and
2B
stimulateprolongedmitogenicresponsesinhuman mitogenesis, which then leads to serious side
valvular interstitial cells via activation of 5-HT effects. Despite the widespread acceptance of the
2B
receptors(Setolaetal.,2003).Aspredictedbythis 5-HT hypothesis as an explanation for fenflur-
study, a recent clinical report found that heavy amine-associated IPAH, the effects of fenflura-
MDMA users display a significantly higher inci- mine and related agents on plasma 5-HT have
dence of valvular regurgitation compared to received little attention. Studies conducted in the
control subjects (Droogmans et al., 2007). More 1990s do not support the 5-HT hypothesis, since
clinical investigations are needed to clearly estab- they show that acute fenfluramine does not
lish the link between illicit MDMA use and the increase plasma 5-HT in rats and chronic fenflur-
risk of developing VHD. amine treatment lowers blood 5-HT in humans
Epidemiological evidence indicates that fenflur- (Martin and Artigas, 1992; Rothman et al.,
amines increase the risk of developing IPAH, a 2000b). Given the uncertainties regarding validity
debilitating and incurable disease (Abenhaim of the 5-HT hypothesis, we assessed the acute
etal.,1996;Fishman,1999).IPAHischaracterized effectsoffenfluramineandotheramphetamineson

## Page 11

395
plasma levels of 5-HT in rats (Zolkowska et al., 10mg/kg/day) or the 5-HT uptake blocker fluox-
2006). Specifically, we developed a novel micro- etine (3 and 10mg/kg/day) on plasma levels of
dialysis method to measure plasma levels of 5-HT 5-HT in rats (Zolkowska et al., 2008). In this
in whole blood samples obtained from conscious study, chronic administration of fenfluramine, but
catheterized rats. Using this method, baseline notfluoxetine,causedtwo-tofourfoldincreasesin
plasma 5-HT levels in rats were found to be baseline dialysate 5-HT levels in blood. Given
0.22nM, or about 1nM when corrected for baseline plasma 5-HT concentrations of about
dialysisproberecovery,whichissimilartoplasma 1nM, fenfluramine-induced increases in plasma
5-HT concentrations measured in human subjects 5-HT are less than 5nM. The data in Fig. 5 show
(Herveetal.,1995).Importantly,systemicadmini- thatchronicexposuretofenfluramineorfluoxetine
stration of fenfluramine, MDMA and other markedly reduces the ability of acute fenfluramine
amphetamines evokes transient dose-dependent to evoke increases in plasma 5-HT. Thus, chronic
increases in plasma 5-HT ranging from 4 to exposure to fenfluramine minimizes the surges in
20nM. The ability of drugs to increase plasma plasma 5-HT caused by acute administration of
5-HT is directly correlated with their ability to the drug. Chronic minipump infusions of fenflur-
increase SERT-mediated 5-HT release in neurons, amine and fluoxetine in rats give rise to steady-
suggesting the involvement of platelet SERT state blood levels of drugs and their bioactive
proteins. These data show that fenfluramine and metabolites that are similar to those measured in
other 5-HT releasers are able to acutely increase human patients taking prescribed doses of these
plasma 5-HT, but the absolute levels of 5-HT are medications (Rothman et al., 2000b; Lundmark
well belowtheconcentrationsrequiredtocontract et al., 2001). Thus, our rat model system is
pulmonary arteries or stimulate mitogenesis relevant to human patients taking fenfluramine
(Cortijo et al., 1997; Eddahibi et al., 1999). or fluoxetine.
From a medication development standpoint, a It has been shown that 5-HT provokes contrac-
more relevantissue iswhetherchronic administra- tion of human pulmonary arteries at concentra-
tion of 5-HT releasers can persistently increase tions ranging from 100nM to 10mM (Cortijo
plasma 5-HT. To address this question, we used et al., 1997). The threshold concentration of 5-HT
microdialysis methods to examine the effects of required to stimulate mitogenic responses in
2-weekminipumpinfusionsoffenfluramine(3and cultured human pulmonary artery smooth muscle
Fig.5. Effectsofacutefenfluramineadministrationondialysate5-HTlevelsmeasuredinbloodfromconsciousratspreviouslytreated
withchronicadministrationoffenfluramine(PanelA)orfluoxetine(PanelB).Forchronictreatments,drugsweredissolvedinsterile
saline(fenfluramine)or50%ethanol/saline(fluoxetine)andadministereds.c.viaosmoticminipumpsfor2weeks.Onthedayoftest,
fenfluramine was dissolved in saline and administered i.v. at 0min. Serial blood samples were withdrawn at 15-min intervals and
immediatelydialyzed.5-HTlevelsaremean7SEMforN¼9rats/group. (cid:2) =Po0.05,comparedtosalinecontrolsatcorresponding
timepoints(Duncan’sposthoctest).DatatakenwithpermissionfromZolkowskaetal.(2008).

## Page 12

396
cellsisabout10nM(Eddahibietal.,2001;Marcos Additional evidence from our laboratory dis-
et al., 2003), while much higher 5-HT concentra- putes a role for 5-HT sites in fenfluramine-
2B
tions are needed to stimulate mitogenic responses associated IPAH (Rothman and Baumann, 2006).
in rat pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells (Pitt Aminorex is a SERT substrate that caused an
et al., 1994; Eddahibi et al., 1999). Because we epidemic of IPAH in the 1960s (Gurtner, 1985;
found that chronic fenfluramine elevates baseline Fishman, 1999), and case reports implicate the
plasma 5-HT to less than 5nM in rats, it appears relateddesignerdrug4-methylaminorexasacause
that fenfluramine-induced increases in plasma of the disease (Gaine et al., 2000). If 5-HT
2B
5-HT are below the concentrations known to receptorsareinvolvedinthepathogenesisofdrug-
cause pulmonary side effects. Fenfluramine- associated IPAH, then one would suspect ami-
induced elevations of plasma 5-HT are also much norextotarget5-HT sites.Whileaminorexdoes
2B
lower than those required to produce VHD in interact with cloned human 5-HT receptors, the
2B
rats exposed to exogenous 5-HT (580–974nM) half-maximum effective concentration (EC ) of
50
(Gustafssonetal.,2005).Viewedcollectively,these the drug for 5-HT receptor activation (870nM)
2B
findings demonstrate that the 5-HT hypothesis is 30-fold higher than its EC for NE release
50
cannot explain the mechanism of fenfluramine- (26.4nM). Moreover, the activity of aminorex at
associatedIPAHorVHD.Ofcourse,itispossible 5-HT sites is nearly 50-fold less than that of
2B
that two- to fourfold increases in plasma 5-HT D-norfenfluramine. It seems plausible that meta-
could be enough to stimulate mitogenic responses bolites of aminorex may act more potently at
in susceptible individuals and increase the 5-HT receptors, and this possibility deserves to
2B
risk of developing IPAH. However, this scenario be examined. However, the available data argue
seems unlikely, since treatment with lithium against an important role for 5-HT receptors in
2B
or MAO inhibitors produces two- to fourfold the pathogenesis of anorectic-associated IPAH.
increases in plasma 5-HT without increasing the RecentstudiesbyEddahibietal.(2006)focuson
risk of IPAH (Artigas et al., 1989; Celada et al., 5-HT produced locally in the lung as a critical
1992). playerinpathogenesisofIPAH.Theseinvestigators
At present, the mechanisms underlying fenflur- reported that endothelial cells in the pulmonary
amine-associated IPAH remain enigmatic. One microvasculature synthesize 5-HT, which is then
significant problem is that most animal models of released as a growth factor. It has been proposed
IPAH require the induction of hypoxia, which is that dysregulation of 5-HT production in endothe-
not a major factor in humans. Furthermore, the lial cells, along with over-expression of SERT by
aetiology of fenfluramine-associated IPAH may the pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells, con-
differ substantially from that of non-drug-related tributes to hyperplasia observed in IPAH. Immu-
IPAH. Despite these caveats, recent findings have nohistochemical studies show that the pulmonary
provided novel hypotheses to explain how fenflur- microvascular endothelium does notexpressSERT
amine might cause IPAH. For example, Launay (Eddahibietal.,2006),indicatingthatfenfluramine
andcolleagues(Launayetal.,2002)haveprovided cannot release 5-HT from these cells. Based on
evidencethatactivationof5-HT receptorsinthe thefindingsofEddahibietal.,administrationofthe
2B
lung is critical to the development of IPAH in a 5-HT precursor L-5-hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP)
hypoxic mouse model. Since the stereoisomers would be predicted to increase 5-HT synthesis in
of norfenfluramine are potent and selective pulmonary endothelial cells, since this compound
5-HT agonists (Rothman et al., 2000a), a bypasses the rate-limiting enzyme tryptophan
2B
role for 5-HT receptors seems feasible. On the hydroxylase. 5-HTP is a commonly used dietary
2B
otherhand,anumberofmedicationsthatproduce supplementwithawell-establishedhistoryofsafety
VHD and activate 5-HT receptors do not (Das et al., 2004), and its use is not known to
2B
increase the risk of IPAH; these medications increase the risk of IPAH. Although speculative,
include methysergide, ergotamine, pergolide and this observation suggests that an increase in
cabergoline. 5-HT synthesis in the pulmonary microvascular

## Page 13

397
endothelial cells may be necessary, but is not fenfluramine causes profound loss of 5-HT. These
sufficient, to increase the risk of IPAH. data indicate that SERT-mediated 5-HT release is
Experiments in laboratory animals show separable from long-term 5-HT depletion.
that high-dose administration of fenfluramine or Elucidating the mechanisms responsible for the
D-fenfluramine can cause long-term depletion of adverse effects of 5-HT releasers will have impor-
5-HT and loss of SERT binding sites in the brain tant implications for the future development of
(Zaczek et al., 1990; McCann et al., 1997). The SERT substrates as pharmacotherapies. The find-
persistent nature of fenfluramine-induced 5-HT ingsreviewedhereprovidecluesfordesigningdual
deficits in the CNS has been interpreted as DA/5-HT releasers devoid of fenfluramine-like
evidence for neurotoxicity, although this hypoth- adverse effects. In particular, any lead drug
esis and its clinical relevance are still a matter of molecule must lack 5-HT agonist activity to
2B
debate (Rose et al., 1996; Rothman et al., 2003b). prevent the risk of VHD. Additionally, candidate
The mechanisms underlying fenfluramine-induced drugs should be chemically distinct from the
5-HTdepletionsarenotwellunderstood,butacute phenylethylamine structure shared by ampheta-
5-HT release has been implicated because 5-HT mine-like agents, as non-amphetamine 5-HT
uptake blockers and synthesis inhibitors can releasers have a reduced capacity for causing
prevent long-term 5-HT depletions (Steranka and neurotoxic effects and possibly IPAH.
Sanders-Bush, 1979; Halladay et al., 2001). An
important observation is that not all SERT
substrates deplete 5-HT (Nichols et al., 1990; PAL-287, a non-amphetamine DA/5-HT releaser
Cozzi et al., 1998; Baumann et al., 2001). As
noted previously, mCPP interacts with SERT to Partially based on the above rationale, we sought
release 5-HT from neurons, and mCPP is equipo- to identify and characterize a non-amphetamine
tent with D-fenfluramine in this regard (Baumann transporter substrate that would release DA and
etal.,1995b,2001;Erikssonetal.,1999).Thedata 5-HT, without affecting release of NE. After an
in Fig. 6 demonstrate that repeated high-dose extensive evaluation of over 350 compounds,
administrationofmCPPfailstoaffectpostmortem we found it impossible to dissociate NE- and
tissue levels of 5-HT in rat brain whereas DA-releasing properties, perhaps due to the
Fig. 6. Effects of high-dose administration of D-fenfluramine (D-FEN) or mCPP on postmortem tissue levels of 5-HT and its
metabolite5-hydroxyindoleaceticacid(5-HIAA)inratbrain.D-FENormCPPwasadministeredi.p.atdosesof10or30mmol/kg,
every2h,forfourdoses.Ratswerekilled2weeksafterthedosingregimen.Postmortemtissuelevelsof5-HTand5-HIAAinthe
prefrontal cortex, nucleus accumbens and caudate nucleus were determined by high-performance liquid chromatography with
electrochemicaldetection(HPLC-ECD).ThesedosesofD-FENandmCPPproduceequivalentincreasesinextracellular5-HT.Data
aremean7SEM,expressedasng/mgproteinforN¼4–6rats/group. (cid:2) Po0.05,comparedtosaline-treatedgroup(Duncan’sposthoc
test).DatatakenwithpermissionfromBaumannetal.(2001).

## Page 14

398
Fig.7. EffectsofPAL-287onneurochemicalandlocomotorparametersinratsundergoinginvivomicrodialysisintheprefrontal
cortex.Ratsreceivedi.v.injectionsof1mg/kgPAL-287attimezero,followedby3mg/kg60minlater.PanelA:ConcentrationsofDA
and5-HTindialysatesamplesaremean7SEMforN¼7rats/group,expressedaspercentageofthebaseline.BaselinelevelsofDA
and5-HTwere0.4370.07and0.2770.06pg/5ml,respectively.PanelB:Locomotorparametersaremean7SEMforN¼7rats/group,
(cid:2)
expressed as distance traveled in cm (ambulation) and number of repetitive movements (stereotypy). Po0.05, compared to pre-
injectioncontrol(Duncan’sposthoctest).DatatakenwithpermissionfromRothmanetal.(2005).
phylogenetic similarities between NET and DAT. PAL-287 produces minimal locomotor activa-
ThefirstleadcompoundfromoursearchwasPAL- tion despite substantial elevations in extracellular
287 (1-napthyl-2-aminopropane, see structure in DA (Fig. 7). Inparticular,the amount ofambula-
Fig. 1), a novel non-amphetamine monoamine tion produced by 3mg/kg PAL-287 is one-third
releaser (Rothman et al., 2005). The in vitro the amount produced by 1mg/kg D-amphetamine,
potency of PAL-287 at releasing radiolabeled even though both drug treatments cause
transmitters from DAT, NET and SERT is 12.67 equivalent DA release. These data suggest that
0.4nM, 11.170.9nM and 3.470.2nM, respec- 5-HT-releasing properties of PAL-287 limit the
tively (see Table 2). Figure 7 shows that adminis- stimulant effects of concurrent DA release.
tration of PAL-287 to rats increases extracellular Repeated high-dose administration of PAL-287
5-HT and DA in a dose-dependent manner, with to rats (18mg/kg i.p., every 2h, for three doses)
larger effects on 5-HT compared to DA. Func- fails to affect brain tissue 5-HT levels when
tional studies with cloned human 5-HT
2
receptors assessed2weeksafterinjections,unlikeD-metham-
reveal that PAL-287 is a full agonist at 5-HT phetamine (6.0mg/kg i.p., every 2h, for three
2B
receptors (EC ¼40nM) and 5-HT receptors doses) and MDMA (7.5mg/kg i.p., every 2h, for
50 2A
(EC ¼466nM). The drug is a potent partial three doses), which cause significant 5-HT deple-
50
agonist at 5-HT receptor sites (EC ¼2.3nM, tions. The data in Fig. 8 show that PAL-287 does
2C 50
E ¼20%), an effect that suggests possible not support self-administration behaviour, and
MAX
anorectic actions of PAL-287 (Vickers et al., 1999; chronic administration of the drug decreases
Nilsson, 2006). 5-HT agonist activity may also cocaine self-administration in rhesus monkeys.
2C
contributetotheminimalreinforcing propertiesof A dose of 1.0mg/kg/h PAL-287 significantly
PAL-287 despite potent DA-releasing actions of reduces both cocaine- and food-maintained
the drug (see Czoty et al., 2002; Higgins and responding, but the suppression of cocaine self-
Fletcher,2003).TheweakerpotencyofPAL-287at administration is somewhat greater than the
5-HT and 5-HT receptors, as compared to its reduction in food-maintained responding.
2A 2B
activity at SERT, suggests that the drug may not Our results with PAL-287 confirm the hypoth-
activate 5-HT and 5-HT receptors in vivo. esis that a non-amphetamine substrate at DAT
2A 2B

## Page 15

399
Fig.8. EffectsofPAL-287inthemonkeyself-administrationassay.PanelA:Self-administrationofcocaineandPAL-287byrhesus
monkeys.Drugs were available undera fixed ratio (FR) 25 scheduleof reinforcement for 2h/day. Each point is the mean of two
sessionsofaccesstoeachdoseofthedrugs.Dataaremean7SEMforN¼4monkeys.Symbolswithoutbarshavevariabilitysmaller
(cid:2)
than the points. Po0.05, compared to saline-injected control (Newman–Keuls post hoc test). Panel B: Effects of chronic 7-day
treatmentwithPAL-287oncocaine-andfood-maintainedresponding.Controllevelsofrespondingweredefinedaslevelsofcocaine-
orfood-maintainedrespondingobservedduring7daysofsalinetreatment.Eachpointshowsmean7SEMforthreemonkeys,with
(cid:2)
datacollectedduringthelast3daysofeach7-daytreatment. =Po0.05,comparedtocontrolforagivenreinforcer(Newman–Keuls
posthoctest).f=Po0.05,comparedtococaine-maintainedrespondingatthatdoseofPAL-287(Newman–Keulsposthoctest).Data
takenwithpermissionfromRothmanetal.(2005).
andSERTwillreleaseDAand5-HTfromneurons Conclusions
invivo,beminimallyreinforcingandalsosuppress
ongoingcocaine self-administration. PAL-287 dis- OurfindingswithPAL-287inmonkeysaresimilar
plays a number of desirable qualities for a to the suppression of cocaine self-administration
candidate treatment medication, including mini- produced by D-amphetamine, although D-amphe-
mal locomotor activation, lack of long-term 5-HT tamine displays greater selectivity in reducing
neurotoxicity and low abuse potential. Further cocaine self-administration as opposed to food-
studies will be necessary to determine the maintained responding (Negus and Mello, 2003a).
potential of PAL-287 for increasing the risk of Grabowskietal.(2001,2004b)showedthataslow-
VHD and IPAH, especially given the 5-HT
2B
release formulation of D-amphetamine is effective
agonist effects of the drug. The present data with in maintaining cocaine addicts in treatment and
PAL-287 support the use of monoamine releasers reducing illicit cocaine use. We predict that agents
as agonist medications for the treatment of such as PAL-287, which have mixed DA/5-HT-
stimulant addictions. A dose of 1.0mg/kg/h releasing activity, will possess the therapeutic
PAL-287 virtually eliminated cocaine self- effectsofamphetamine-typemonoaminereleasers,
administration in rhesus monkeys by the end of while minimizing the adverse effects associated
the 7-day treatment, although this effect was not with the phenethylamine structure. Based on
entirelyselectiveforcocainevs.food.Wealsonote observations that dual DA/5-HT releasers sup-
that the role of NE in the actions of PAL-287 press alcohol ingestion (Yu et al., 1997; Halladay
is an important issue awaiting additional study etal.,1999,2006),itseemsthatPAL-287orsimilar
(Rothman et al., 2001). agents shouldbetestedaspotentialtreatmentsfor

## Page 16

400
alcohol addiction. Additionally, combined treat- IPAH idiopathic pulmonary arterial
ment with DA and 5-HT releasers blocks alcohol hypertension
withdrawal seizures (Yu et al., 1997). Although mCPP m-chlorophenylpiperazine
further work remains to refine PAL-287, in MDA 3,4-methylenedioxyamphetamine
particular to reduce its potency at 5-HT recep- MDMA 3,4-methylenedioxymethampheta-
2B
tors, we believe that PAL-287 represents the mine
prototype for a new generation of drugs that NE norepinephrine
enhancemonoaminereleasebyactingassubstrates NET norepinephrine transporter
at multiple transporters. PAL-287 1-naphthyl-2-aminopropane
WhilecompoundssuchasPAL-287moveslowly PAL-313 p-methylamphetamine
from the preclinical arena towards clinical deve- PAL-353 m-fluoroamphetamine
lopment, it is possible to test the concept of Ro 60-0175 (S)-2-(6-chloro-5-fluoroindol-1-yl)-
administering dual DA/5-HT releasers in humans 1-methylethylamine
by implementing clinically available compounds. SB 242084 6-chloro-5-methyl-1-[[2-[(2-methyl-
For example, the utility of DA/5-HT releasers as 3-pyridyl)oxy]-5-pyridyl]carbamoyl]-
treatmentsforaddictivedisorderscanbetestedby indoline
administration of the DA releaser D-amphetamine SERT serotonin transporter
along with the 5-HT precursor 5-HTP. It is VHD valvular heart disease
noteworthy that 5-HTP must be co-administered VMAT2 vesicular monoamine transporter
with the peripheral decarboxylase inhibitor carbi- type 2
dopa to selectively increase extracellular 5-HT in VTA ventral tegmental area
theCNS(seeHalladayetal.,2006).Moreover,the
utility of DA/5-HT releasers could also be tested Acknowledgements
using phentermine and 5-HTP/carbidopa, a drug
combination with predicted efficacy asan appetite This research was supported in part by the
suppressant (Rothman and Baumann, 2008). In Intramural Research Program of the NIH, NIDA
summary, we suggest that drugs with a mode of and NIDA R01 DA12970 to Bruce Blough.
action similar to that of PAL-287 will provide
neurochemical normalization therapy for stimu-
lant addictions and might also be useful for References
treating depression, obsessive compulsive dis-
order, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and Abenhaim,L.,Moride,Y.,Brenot,F.,Rich,S.,Benichou,J.,
obesity. Kurz,X.,Higenbottam,T.,Oakley,C.,Wouters,E.,Aubier,
M., Simonneau, G. and Begaud, B. (1996) Appetite-
suppressant drugs and the risk of primary pulmonary
hypertension. International Primary Pulmonary Hyperten-
sionStudyGroup.N.Engl.J.Med.,335(9):609–616.
Alex,K.D.andPehek,E.A.(2007)Pharmacologicmechanisms
Abbreviations of serotonergic regulation of dopamine neurotransmission.
Pharmacol.Ther.,113(2):296–320.
CNS central nervous system Alexander,M.,Rothman,R.B.,Baumann,M.H.,Endres,C.J.,
Brasic, J.R. and Wong, D.F. (2005) Noradrenergic and
CPP conditioned place preference
dopaminergiceffectsof(+)-amphetamine-likestimulantsin
DA dopamine
thebaboonPapioanubis.Synapse,56(2):94–99.
DAT dopamine transporter Alim, T.N., Rosse, R.B., Vocci, F.J., Jr., Lindquist, T. and
EC half-maximaleffectiveconcentration Deutsch, S.I. (1995) Diethylpropion pharmacotherapeutic
50
E maximal efficacy adjuvant therapy for inpatient treatment of cocaine depen-
MAX dence: a test of the cocaine-agonist hypothesis. Clin.
GABA gamma-aminobutyric acid
Neuropharmacol.,18(2):183–195.
5-HT 5-hydroxytryptamine or serotonin
Amara, S.G. and Kuhar, M.J. (1993) Neurotransmitter trans-
5-HTP L-5-hydroxytryptophan porters:recentprogress.Annu.Rev.Neurosci.,16:73–93.

## Page 17

401
Amara, S.G. and Sonders, M.S. (1998) Neurotransmitter Bubar,M.J.andCunningham,K.A.(2006)Serotonin5-HT2A
transporters as molecular targets for addictive drugs. Drug and5-HT2Creceptorsaspotentialtargetsformodulationof
AlcoholDepend.,51(1–2):87–96. psychostimulant use and dependence. Curr. Top. Med.
Anonymous. (1995) Increasing morbidity and mortality asso- Chem.,6(18):1971–1985.
ciated with abuse of methamphetamine — United States, Bubar, M.J. and Cunningham, K.A. (2007) Distribution of
1991–1994.Morb.Mortal.Wkly.Rep.,44(47):882–886. serotonin 5-HT2C receptors in the ventral tegmental area.
Arnsten,A.F.(2006)Stimulants:therapeuticactionsinADHD. Neuroscience,146(1):286–297.
Neuropsychopharmacology,31(11):2376–2383. Burmeister, J.J., Lungren, E.M., Kirschner, K.F. and Neise-
Artigas,F.,Sarrias,M.J.,Martinez,E.,Gelpi,E.,Alvarez,E. wander, J.L. (2004) Differential roles of 5-HT receptor
and Udina, C. (1989) Increased plasma free serotonin but subtypesincueandcocainereinstatementofcocaine-seeking
unchanged platelet serotonin in bipolar patients treated behavior in rats. Neuropsychopharmacology, 29(4): 660–
chronically with lithium. Psychopharmacology (Berl.), 668.
99(3):328–332. Burmeister,J.J., Lungren,E.M.andNeisewander, J.L. (2003)
Bana, D.S., Macneal, P.S., Lecompte, P.M., Shah, Y. and Effects of fluoxetine and D-fenfluramine on cocaine-seeking
Graham, J.R. (1974) Cardiac murmurs and endocardial behaviorinrats.Psychopharmacology,168(1–2):146–154.
fibrosisassociatedwithmethysergidetherapy.Am.HeartJ., Buydens-Branchey,L.,Branchey,M.,Hudson,J.,Rothman,M.,
88(5):640–655. Fergeson, P. and Mckernin, C. (1998) Effect of fenflura-
Barnes, N.M. and Sharp,T. (1999) A review of central 5-HT minechallengeoncocainecravinginaddictedmaleusers.Am.
receptors and their function. Neuropharmacology, 38(8): J.Addict.,7(2):142–155.
1083–1152. Carroll, M.E., Lac, S.T., Asencio, M. and Kragh, R. (1990)
Baumann, M.H., Ayestas, M.A., Dersch, C.M., Brockington, Fluoxetinereducesintravenouscocaineself-administrationin
A., Rice, K.C. and Rothman, R.B. (2000) Effects of rats.Pharmacol.Biochem.Behav.,35(1):237–244.
phentermineandfenfluramineonextracellulardopamineand Celada, P., Dolera, M., Alvarez, E. and Artigas, F. (1992)
serotonininratnucleusaccumbens:therapeuticimplications. Effectsofacuteandchronictreatmentwithfluvoxamineon
Synapse,36(2):102–113. extracellular and platelet serotonin in the blood of major
Baumann, M.H.,Ayestas, M.A.,Dersch, C.M.andRothman, depressive patients. Relationship to clinical improvement.
R.B.(2001)1-(m-Chlorophenyl)piperazine(mCPP)dissociates J.Affect.Disord.,25(4):243–249.
invivoserotoninreleasefromlong-termserotonindepletion Connolly,H.M.,Crary,J.L.,McGoon,M.D.,Hensrud,D.D.,
inratbrain.Neuropsychopharmacology,24(5):492–501. Edwards,B.S.andSchaff,H.V.(1997)Valvularheartdisease
Baumann, M.H., Becketts, K.M. and Rothman, R.B. (1995a) associatedwithfenfluramine-phentermine.N.Engl.J.Med.,
Evidenceforalterationsinpresynapticserotonergicfunction 337(9):581–588.
during withdrawal from chronic cocaine in rats. Eur. J. Connolly,H.M.andMcGoon,M.D.(1999)Obesitydrugsand
Pharmacol.,282(1–3):87–93. theheart.Curr.Probl.Cardiol.,24(12):745–792.
Baumann, M.H., Mash, D.C. and Staley, J.K. (1995b) The Cortijo, J., Marti-Cabrera, M., Bernabeu, E., Domenech, T.,
serotoninagonistm-chlorophenylpiperazine(mCPP)bindsto Bou, J., Fernandez, A.G., Beleta, J., Palacios, J.M. and
serotonin transporter sites in human brain. Neuroreport, Morcillo,E.J.(1997)Characterizationof5-HTreceptorson
6(16):2150–2152. human pulmonary artery and vein: functional and binding
Baumann, M.H. and Rothman, R.B. (1998a) Alterations in studies.Br.J.Pharmacol.,122(7):1455–1463.
serotonergic responsiveness during cocaine withdrawal in Cozzi,N.V.,Frescas,S.,Marona-Lewicka,D.,Huang,X.and
rats: similarities to major depression in humans. Biol. Nichols, D.E. (1998) Indan analogs of fenfluramine and
Psychiatry,44(7):578–591. norfenfluraminehavereducedneurotoxicpotential.Pharma-
Baumann, M.H. and Rothman, R.B. (1998b) Serotonergic col.Biochem.Behav.,59(3):709–715.
dysfunction during cocaine withdrawal: implications for Czoty, P.W., Ginsburg, B.C. and Howell, L.L. (2002)
cocaine-induced depression. In: Karch S.B. (Ed.), Drug Serotonergicattenuationofthereinforcingandneurochemi-
AbuseHandbook.CRCPress,BocaRaton,pp.463–484. caleffectsofcocaineinsquirrelmonkeys.J.Pharmacol.Exp.
Baumann, M.H., Rutter, J.J. and Auerbach, S.B. (1993) Ther.,300(3):831–837.
Intravenous administration of the serotonin agonist m- Dackis,C.A.andGold,M.S.(1985)Newconceptsincocaine
chlorophenylpiperazine (mCPP) increases extracellular ser- addiction: the dopamine depletion hypothesis. Neurosci.
otonininthediencephalonofawakerats.Neuropharmacol- Biobehav.Rev.,9(3):469–477.
ogy,32(12):1381–1386. Das,G.(1993)CocaineabuseinNorthAmerica:amilestonein
Blakely, R.D., Defelice, L.J. and Galli, A. (2005) Biogenic history.J.Clin.Pharmacol.,33(4):296–310.
amineneurotransmittertransporters:justwhenyouthought Das, Y.T., Bagchi, M., Bagchi, D. and Preuss, H.G. (2004)
youknewthem.Physiology(Bethesda),20(4):225–231. Safety of 5-hydroxy-L-tryptophan. Toxicol. Lett., 150(1):
Bredberg,U.,Eyjolfsdottir,G.S.,Paalzow,L.,Tfelt-Hansen,P. 111–122.
and Tfelt-Hansen, V. (1986) Pharmacokinetics of methyser- Daw, N.D., Kakade, S. and Dayan, P. (2002) Opponent
gide and its metabolite methylergometrine in man. Eur. J. interactionsbetweenserotoninanddopamine.NeuralNetw.,
Clin.Pharmacol.,30(1):75–77. 15(4–6):603–616.

## Page 18

402
DiChiara,G.,Bassareo,V.,Fenu,S.,DeLuca,M.A.,Spina, Fleckenstein, A.E., Volz, T.J., Riddle, E.L., Gibb, J.W. and
L., Cadoni, C., Acquas, E., Carboni, E., Valentini, V. and Hanson, G.R. (2007) New insights into the mechanism of
Lecca, D. (2004) Dopamine and drug addiction: the action of amphetamines. Annu. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol.,
nucleus accumbens shell connection. Neuropharmacology, 47:681–698.
47(Suppl.1):227–241. Fletcher, P.J., Chintoh, A.F., Sinyard, J. and Higgins, G.A.
Di Matteo, V., De Blasi, A., Di Giulio, C. and Esposito, E. (2004) Injectionofthe 5-HT2CreceptoragonistRo60-0175
(2001)Roleof5-HT(2C)receptorsin thecontrolofcentral into the ventral tegmental area reduces cocaine-induced
dopaminefunction.TrendsPharmacol.Sci.,22(5):229–232. locomotor activity and cocaine self-administration. Neuro-
DiMatteo,V.,DiGiovanni,G.,DiMascio,M.andEsposito, psychopharmacology,29(2):308–318.
E. (1999) SB 242084, a selective serotonin2C receptor Fletcher, P.J., Grottick, A.J. and Higgins, G.A. (2002)
antagonist, increases dopaminergic transmission in the Differential effects of the 5-HT(2A) receptor antagonist
mesolimbicsystem.Neuropharmacology,38(8):1195–1205. M100907 and the 5-HT(2C) receptor antagonist SB242084
DiMatteo,V.,DiGiovanni,G.,DiMascio,M.andEsposito, on cocaine-induced locomotor activity, cocaine self-admini-
E. (2000) Biochemical and electrophysiological evidence stration and cocaine-induced reinstatement of responding.
that RO 60-0175 inhibits mesolimbic dopaminergic Neuropsychopharmacology,27(4):576–586.
function through serotonin(2C) receptors. Brain Res., Gaine, S.P., Rubin, L.J., Kmetzo, J.J., Palevsky, H.I. and
865(1):85–90. Traill, T.A. (2000) Recreational use of aminorex and
Droogmans, S., Cosyns, B., D’haenen, H., Creeten, E., pulmonaryhypertension.Chest,118(5):1496–1497.
Weytjens, C., Franken, P.R., Scott, B., Schoors, D., Garlow, S.J., Purselle, D. and D’orio, B. (2003) Cocaine use
Kemdem, A., Close, L., Vandenbossche, J.-L., Bechet, S. disordersandsuicidalideation.DrugAlcoholDepend.,70(1):
andVanCamp,G.(2007)Possibleassociationbetween3,4- 101–104.
methylenedioxymethamphetamine abuse and valvular heart Gawin, F.H. and Kleber, H.D. (1986) Abstinence symptoma-
disease.Am.J.Cardiol.,100(9):1442–1445. tology and psychiatric diagnosis in cocaine abusers. Arch.
Eddahibi,S.,Fabre,V.,Boni,C.,Martres,M.P.,Raffestin,B., Gen.Psychiatry,43(2):107–113.
Hamon, M. and Adnot, S. (1999) Induction of serotonin Ghitza, U.E., Rothman, R.B., Gorelick, D.A., Henningfield,
transporterbyhypoxiainpulmonaryvascularsmoothmuscle J.E.andBaumann,M.H.(2007)Serotonergicresponsiveness
cells. Relationship with the mitogenic action of serotonin. in human cocaine users. Drug Alcohol Depend., 86(2–3):
Circ.Res.,84(3):329–336. 207–213.
Eddahibi, S., Guignabert, C., Barlier-Mur, A.M., Dewachter, Glatz, A.C., Ehrlich, M., Bae, R.S., Clarke, M.J., Quinlan,
L., Fadel, E., Dartevelle,P., Humbert, M., Simonneau, G., P.A., Brown, E.C., Rada, P. and Hoebel, B.G. (2002)
Hanoun,N., Saurini, F., Hamon, M. and Adnot, S. (2006) Inhibition of cocaine self-administration by fluoxetine or
Cross talk between endothelial and smooth muscle cells in D-fenfluramine combined with phentermine. Pharmacol.
pulmonary hypertension: critical role for serotonin-induced Biochem.Behav.,71(1–2):197–204.
smoothmusclehyperplasia.Circulation,113(15):1857–1864. Glowa,J.R.,Rice,K.C.,Matecka,D.andRothman,R.B.(1997)
Eddahibi,S.,Humbert,M.,Fadel,E.,Raffestin,B.,Darmon, Phentermine/fenfluramine decreases cocaine self-administra-
M.,Capron,F.,Simonneau,G.,Dartevelle,P.,Hamon,M. tioninrhesusmonkeys.Neuroreport,8(6):1347–1351.
andAdnot,S.(2001)Serotonintransporteroverexpressionis Glowa, J.R., Wojnicki, F.H.E., Matecka, D., Rice, K.C. and
responsibleforpulmonaryarterysmoothmusclehyperplasia Rothman, R.B. (1995) Effects of dopamine reuptake
inprimarypulmonaryhypertension.J.Clin.Invest.,108(8): inhibitors on food- and cocaine-maintained responding: II:
1141–1150. comparisonswithotherdrugsandrepeatedadministrations.
Eriksson,E.,Engberg,G.,Bing,O.andNissbrandt,H.(1999) Exp.Clin.Psychopharmacol.,3(4):232–239.
Effects of mCPP on the extracellular concentrations of Gobert, A., Rivet, J.M., Lejeune, F., Newman-Tancredi, A.,
serotonin and dopamine in rat brain. Neuropsychopharma- Adhumeau-Auclair, A., Nicolas, J.P., Cistarelli, L., Melon,
cology,20(3):287–296. C.andMillan,M.J.(2000)Serotonin(2C)receptorstonically
Filip,M.andCunningham,K.A.(2003)Hyperlocomotiveand suppress the activity of mesocortical dopaminergic and
discriminative stimulus effects of cocaine are under the adrenergic, but not serotonergic, pathways: a combined
control of serotonin(2C) (5-HT(2C)) receptors in rat pre- dialysisandelectrophysiologicalanalysisintherat.Synapse,
frontalcortex.J.Pharmacol.Exp.Ther.,306(2):734–743. 36(3):205–221.
Fishman, A.P. (1999) Aminorex to fen/phen: an epidemic Gonzalez Castro, F., Barrington, E.H., Walton, M.A. and
foretold.Circulation,99(1):156–161. Rawson,R.A.(2000)Cocaineandmethamphetamine:differ-
Fitzgerald, L.W., Burn, T.C., Brown, B.S., Patterson, J.P., ential addiction rates. Psychol. Addict. Behav., 14(4):
Corjay, M.H., Valentine, P.A., Sun, J.H., Link, J.R., 390–396.
Abbaszade, I., Hollis, J.M., Largent, B.L., Hartig, P.R., Gorelick, D.A. (1998) The rate hypothesis and agonist
Hollis,G.F.,Meunier,P.C.,Robichaud,A.J.andRobertson, substitution approaches to cocaine abuse treatment. Adv.
D.W. (2000) Possible role of valvular serotonin 5-HT Pharmacol.,42:995–997.
2B
receptors in the cardiopathy associated with fenfluramine. Grabowski, J., Roache, J.D., Schmitz, J.M., Rhoades, H.,
Mol.Pharmacol.,57(1):75–81. Creson,D.andKorszun,A.(1997)Replacementmedication

## Page 19

403
for cocaine dependence: methylphenidate. J. Clin. Psycho- Herve, P., Launay, J.-M., Scrobohaci, M.-L., Brenot, F.,
pharmacol.,17(6):485–488. Simonneau, G., Petitpretz, P., Poubeau, P., Cerrina, J.,
Grabowski,J.,Rhoades,H.,Schmitz,J.,Stotts,A.,Daruzska, Duroux,P.andDrouet,L.(1995)Increasedplasmaserotonin
L.A.,Creson,D.andMoeller,F.G.(2001)Dextroampheta- in primary pulmonary hypertension. Am. J. Med., 99(3):
mine for cocaine-dependence treatment: a double-blind 249–254.
randomized clinical trial. J. Clin. Psychopharmacol., 21(5): Higgins, G.A. and Fletcher, P.J. (2003) Serotonin and drug
522–526. reward: focus on 5-HT2C receptors. Eur. J. Pharmacol.,
Grabowski,J.,Rhoades,H.,Stotts,A.,Cowan,K.,Kopecky, 480(1–3):151–162.
C.,Dougherty,A.,Moeller,F.G.,Hassan,S.andSchmitz,J. Howell, L.L. and Byrd, L.D. (1995) Serotonergic modulation
(2004a)Agonist-likeorantagonist-liketreatmentforcocaine of the behavioral effects of cocaine in the squirrel monkey.
dependence with methadone for heroin dependence: two J.Pharmacol.Exp.Ther.,275(3):1551–1559.
double-blind randomized clinical trials. Neuropsychophar- Howell,L.L.,Carroll,F.I.,Votaw,J.R.,Goodman,M.M.and
macology,29(5):969–981. Kimmel, H.L. (2007) Effects of combined dopamine and
Grabowski,J.,Shearer,J.,Merrill,J.andNegus,S.S.(2004b) serotonintransporterinhibitorsoncocaineself-administration
Agonist-like, replacement pharmacotherapy for stimulant inrhesusmonkeys.J.Pharmacol.Exp.Ther.,320(2):757–765.
abuseanddependence.Addict.Behav.,29(7):1439–1464. Hoyer, D., Clarke, D.E., Fozard, J.R., Hartig, P.R., Martin,
Greenhill,L.L.(2006)Thescienceofstimulantabuse.Pediatr. G.R.,Mylecharane,E.J.,Saxena,P.R.andHumphrey,P.P.
Ann.,35(8):552–556. (1994)InternationalUnionofPharmacologyclassificationof
Grottick,A.J.,Fletcher,P.J.andHiggins,G.A.(2000)Studies receptors for 5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin). Pharmacol.
toinvestigatetheroleof5-HT(2C)receptorsoncocaine-and Rev.,46(2):157–203.
food-maintainedbehavior.J.Pharmacol.Exp.Ther.,295(3): Hoyer,D.,Hannon,J.P.andMartin,G.R.(2002)Molecular,
1183–1191. pharmacologicalandfunctionaldiversityof5-HTreceptors.
Gurtner, H.P. (1985) Aminorex and pulmonary hypertension. Pharmacol.Biochem.Behav.,71(4):533–554.
CorVasa,27(2–3):160–171. Hyman, S.E. (2005) Addiction: a disease of learning and
Gustafsson, B.I., Tommeras, K., Nordrum, I., Loennechen, memory.Am.J.Psychiatry,162(8):1414–1422.
J.P., Brunsvik, A., Solligard, E., Fossmark, R., Bakke, I., Ishida, M., Otani, K., Kaneko, S., Ohkubo, T., Osanai, T.,
Syversen, U. and Waldum, H. (2005) Long-term serotonin Yasui,N.,Mihara,K.,Higuchi,H.andSugawara,K.(1995)
administration induces heart valve disease in rats. Circula- Effectsofvariousfactorsonsteadystateplasmaconcentra-
tion,111(12):1517–1522. tions of trazodone and its active metabolite m-chlorophe-
Hafizi,S.,Taylor,P.M.,Chester,A.H.,Allen,S.P.andYacoub, nylpiperazine.Int.Clin.Psychopharmacol.,10(3):143–146.
M.H. (2000) Mitogenic and secretory responses of human Iversen, L. (2006) Neurotransmitter transporters and their
valve interstitial cells to vasoactive agents. J. Heart Valve impact on the development of psychopharmacology. Br. J.
Dis.,9(3):454–458. Pharmacol.,147(S1):S82–S88.
Halladay, A.K., Kirschner, E., Hesse, K., Fisher, H. and Kalivas, P.W. and O’Brien, C. (2008) Drug addiction as a
Wagner,G.C.(2001)Roleofmonoamineoxidaseinhibition pathologyofstagedneuroplasticity.Neuropsychopharmaco-
and monoamine depletion in fenfluramine-induced neuro- logy,33(1):166–180.
toxicity and serotonin release. Pharmacol. Toxicol., 89(5): Kampman, K.M., Rukstalis, M., Pettinati, H., Muller, E.,
237–248. Acosta,T.,Gariti,P.,Ehrman,R.andO’Brien,C.P.(2000)
Halladay, A.K., Wagner, G.C., Hsu, T., Sekowski, A. and The combination of phentermine and fenfluramine reduced
Fisher, H. (1999) Differential effects of monoaminergic cocaine withdrawal symptoms in an open trial. J. Subst.
agonistsonalcoholintakeinratsfedatryptophan-enhanced AbuseTreat.,19(1):77–79.
diet.Alcohol,18(1):55–64. Koob,G.F.(2003)Alcoholism:allostasisandbeyond.Alcohol.
Halladay,A.K.,Wagner,G.C.,Sekowski,A.,Rothman,R.B., Clin.Exp.Res.,27(2):232–243.
Baumann,M.H.andFisher,H.(2006)Alterationsinalcohol Koob, G.F., Roberts, A.J., Schulteis, G., Parsons, L.H.,
consumption,withdrawalseizures,andmonoaminetransmis- Heyser, C.J., Hyytia, P., Merlo-Pich, E. and Weiss, F.
sion in rats treated with phentermine and 5-hydroxy-L- (1998) Neurocircuitry targets in ethanol reward and depen-
tryptophan.Synapse,59(5):277–289. dence.Alcohol.Clin.Exp.Res.,22(1):3–9.
Haney, M., Ward, A.S., Gerra, G. and Foltin, R.W. (2001) Launay,J.M.,Herve,P.,Peoc’h,K.,Tournois,C.,Callebert,J.,
NeuroendocrineeffectsofD-fenfluramineandbromocriptine Nebigil, C.G., Etienne, N., Drouet, L., Humbert, M.,
followingrepeatedsmokedcocaineinhumans.DrugAlcohol Simonneau, G. and Maroteaux, L. (2002) Function of the
Depend.,64(1):63–73. serotonin 5-hydroxytryptamine 2B receptor in pulmonary
Hendrikx, M., Van Dorpe, J., Flameng, W. and Daenen, W. hypertension.Nat.Med.,8(10):1129–1135.
(1996)Aorticandmitralvalvediseaseinducedbyergotamine Lesch,K.P.(2005)Alcoholdependenceandgenexenvironment
therapy for migraine: a case report and review of the interactioninemotionregulation:isserotoninthelink?.Eur.
literature.J.HeartValveDis.,5(2):235–237. J.Pharmacol.,526(1–3):113–124.
Henningfield, J.E. (1995) Nicotine medications for smoking Levy, A.D., Li, Q. and Van De Kar, L.D. (1994) Repeated
cessation.N.Engl.J.Med.,333(18):1196–1203. cocaine exposure inhibits the adrenocorticotropic hormone

## Page 20

404
response to the serotonin releaser D-fenfluramine and the McGregor, A., Lacosta, S. and Roberts, D.C. (1993)
5-HT1A agonist, 8-OH-DPAT. Neuropharmacology, L-tryptophandecreases the breaking point under a progres-
33(3–4):335–342. sive ratio schedule of intravenous cocaine reinforcement in
Lile,J.A.(2006)Pharmacologicaldeterminantsofthereinfor- therat.Pharmacol.Biochem.Behav.,44(3):651–655.
cingeffectsofpsychostimulants:relationtoagonistsubstitu- Mogenson, G.J., Jones, D.L. and Yim, C.Y. (1980) From
tiontreatment.Exp.Clin.Psychopharmacol.,14(1):20–33. motivationtoaction:functionalinterfacebetweenthelimbic
Lin,D.,Koob,G.F.andMarkou,A.(1999)Differentialeffects system and the motor system. Prog. Neurobiol., 14(2–3):
of withdrawal from chronic amphetamine or fluoxetine 69–97.
administration on brain stimulation reward in the rat — Molliver, M.E. (1987) Serotonergic neuronal systems: what
interactions between the two drugs. Psychopharmacology, their anatomicorganizationtellsusaboutfunction.J.Clin.
145(3):283–294. Psychopharmacol.,7(6Suppl):3S–23S.
Ling,W.,Rawson,R.A.andCompton,M.A.(1994)Substitu- Moore, R.Y. and Bloom, F.E. (1978) Central catecholamine
tion pharmacotherapies for opioid addiction: from metha- neuron systems: anatomy and physiology of the dopamine
donetoLAAMandbuprenorphine.J.PsychoactiveDrugs, systems.Annu.Rev.Neurosci.,1:129–169.
26(2):119–128. Muller, C.P. and Huston, J.P. (2006) Determining the region-
Liu, S., Bubar, M.J., Lanfranco, M.F., Hillman, G.R. and specificcontributionsof5-HTreceptorstothepsychostimu-
Cunningham,K.A.(2007)Serotonin2Creceptorlocalization lant effects of cocaine. Trends Pharmacol. Sci., 27(2):
in GABA neurons of the rat medial prefrontal cortex: 105–112.
implications for understanding the neurobiology of addic- Musto,D.F.(1992)Cocaine’shistory,especiallytheAmerican
tion.Neuroscience,146(4):1677–1688. experience.CibaFound.Symp.,166:7–14.
Lopez-Ilasaca, M. (1998) Signaling from G-protein-coupled Negus, S.S. and Mello, N.K. (2003a) Effects of chronic
receptors to mitogen-activated protein (MAP)-kinase cas- D-amphetamine treatment on cocaine- and food-maintained
cades.Biochem.Pharmacol.,56(3):269–277. responding under a progressive-ratio schedule in rhesus
Lundmark, J., Reis, M. and Bengtsson, F. (2001) Serum monkeys.Psychopharmacology,167(3):324–332.
concentrationsoffluoxetineintheclinicaltreatmentsetting. Negus, S.S. and Mello, N.K. (2003b) Effects of chronic
Ther.DrugMonit.,23(2):139–147. D-amphetamine treatment on cocaine- and food-maintained
Maclean,M.R., Herve,P., Eddahibi,S. and Adnot,S. (2000) respondingunderasecond-orderscheduleinrhesusmonkeys.
5-hydroxytryptamine and the pulmonary circulation: recep- DrugAlcoholDepend.,70(1):39–52.
tors, transporters and relevance to pulmonary arterial Negus, S.S., Mello, N.K., Blough, B.E., Baumann, M.H. and
hypertension.Br.J.Pharmacol.,131(2):161–168. Rothman, R.B. (2007) Monoamine releasers with varying
Mann, J.J. (2003) Neurobiology of suicidal behaviour. Nat. selectivity for dopamine/norepinephrine versus serotonin
Rev.Neurosci.,4(10):819–828. release as candidate ‘‘agonist’’ medications for cocaine
Marcos,E.,Adnot,S.,Pham,M.H.,Nosjean,A.,Raffestin,B., dependence:studies in assays of cocaine discrimination and
Hamon, M. and Eddahibi, S. (2003) Serotonin transporter cocaineself-administrationinrhesusmonkeys.J.Pharmacol.
inhibitors protect against hypoxic pulmonary hypertension. Exp.Ther.,320(2):627–636.
Am.J.Respir.Crit.CareMed.,168(4):487–493. Nemecek, G.M., Coughlin, S.R., Handley, D.A. and Mosko-
Markou,A.andKoob,G.F.(1991)Postcocaineanhedonia.An witz, M.A. (1986) Stimulation of aortic smooth muscle cell
animal model of cocaine withdrawal. Neuropsychopharma- mitogenesis by serotonin. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.,
cology,4(1):17–26. 83(3):674–678.
Martin, F. and Artigas, F. (1992) Simultaneous effects of Ni, W. and Watts, S.W. (2006) 5-hydroxytryptamine in the
p-chloroamphetamine,D-fenfluramine,andreserpineonfree cardiovascular system: focus on the serotonin transporter
and stored 5-hydroxytryptamine in brain and blood. (SERT).Clin.Exp.Pharmacol.Physiol.,33(7):575–583.
J.Neurochem.,59(3):1138–1144. Nichols,D.E.,Brewster,W.K.,Johnson,M.P.,Oberlender,R.
Martinez, D., Narendran, R., Foltin, R.W., Slifstein, M., and Riggs, R.M. (1990) Nonneurotoxic tetralin and indan
Hwang,D.R.,Broft,A.,Huang,Y.,Cooper,T.B.,Fischman, analogues of 3,4-(methylenedioxy)amphetamine (MDA).
M.W.,Kleber,H.D.andLaruelle,M.(2007)Amphetamine- J.Med.Chem.,33(2):703–710.
induced dopamine release: markedly blunted in cocaine Nilsson, B.M. (2006) 5-Hydroxytryptamine 2C (5-HT2C)
dependence and predictive of the choice to self-administer receptor agonists as potential antiobesity agents. J. Med.
cocaine.Am.J.Psychiatry,164(4):622–629. Chem.,49(14):4023–4034.
Masson,J.,Sagne,C.,Hamon,M.andElMestikawy,S.(1999) Otani, K., Mihara, K., Yasui, N., Ishida, M., Kondo, T.,
Neurotransmittertransportersinthecentralnervoussystem. Tokinaga, N., Ohkubo, T., Osanai, T., Sugawara, K. and
Pharmacol.Rev.,51(3):439–464. Kaneko, S. (1997) Plasma concentrations of trazodone and
McCann, U.D., Seiden, L.S., Rubin, L.J. and Ricaurte, G.A. m-chlorophenylpiperazine at steady state can be predicted
(1997)Brainserotoninneurotoxicityandprimarypulmonary from those after an initial dose of trazodone. Prog.
hypertension from fenfluramine and dexfenfluramine. A Neuropsychopharmacol.Biol.Psychiatry,21(1):239–244.
systematic review of the evidence. J. Am. Med. Assoc., Parsons, L.H., Koob, G.F. and Weiss, F. (1995) Serotonin
278(8):666–672. dysfunction in the nucleus accumbens of rats during

## Page 21

405
withdrawal after unlimited access to intravenous cocaine. Rothman, R.B. and Baumann, M.H. (2006) Therapeutic
J.Pharmacol.Exp.Ther.,274(3):1182–1191. potential of monoamine transporter substrates. Curr. Top.
Parsons, L.H., Smith, A.D. and Justice, J.B., Jr. (1991) Basal Med.Chem.,6(17):1845–1859.
extracellular dopamine is decreased in the rat nucleus Rothman, R.B., Baumann, M.H., Dersch, C.M., Romero,
accumbensduringabstinencefromchroniccocaine.Synapse, D.V., Rice, K.C., Carroll, F.I. and Partilla, J.S. (2001)
9(1):60–65. Amphetamine-typecentralnervoussystemstimulantsrelease
Pennartz,C.M.,Groenewegen,H.J.andLopesDaSilva,F.H. norepinephrine more potently than they release dopamine
(1994)Thenucleusaccumbensasacomplexoffunctionally andserotonin.Synapse,39(1):32–41.
distinct neuronal ensembles: an integration of behavioural, Rothman, R.B., Baumann, M.H., Savage, J.E., Rauser, L.,
electrophysiological and anatomical data. Prog. Neurobiol., Mcbride, A., Hufisein, S. and Roth, B.L. (2000a) Evidence
42(6):719–761. for possibleinvolvement of5-HT receptorsinthe cardiac
2B
Pitt,B.R.,Weng,W.,Steve,A.R.,Blakely,R.D.,Reynolds,I. valvulopathyassociatedwithfenfluramineandotherseroto-
andDavies,P.(1994)SerotoninincreasesDNAsynthesisin nergicmedications.Circulation,102(23):2836–2841.
rat proximal and distal pulmonary vascular smooth muscle Rothman, R.B., Redmon, J.B., Raatz, S.K., Kwong, C.A.,
cellsinculture.Am.J.Physiol.,266(2):L178–L186. Swanson, J.E. and Bantle, J.P. (2000b) Chronic treatment
Porter,R.H.,Benwell,K.R.,Lamb,H.,Malcolm,C.S.,Allen, withphenterminecombinedwithfenfluraminelowersplasma
N.H., Revell, D.F., Adams, D.R. and Sheardown, M.J. serotonin.Am.J.Cardiol.,85(7):913–915.
(1999) Functional characterization of agonists at recombi- Rothman, R.B., Blough, B.E. and Baumann, M.H. (2002)
nanthuman5-HT ,5-HT and5-HT receptorsinCHO- Appetite suppressants as agonist substitution therapies for
2A 2B 2C
K1cells.Br.J.Pharmacol.,128(1):13–20. stimulantdependence.Ann.N.Y.Acad.Sci.,965:109–126.
Rea, W.P., Rothman, R.B. and Shippenberg, T.S. (1998) Rothman,R.B.,Blough,B.E.andBaumann,M.H.(2007)Dual
Evaluationoftheconditionedreinforcingeffectsofphenter- dopamine/serotonin releasers as potential medications for
mine and fenfluramine in the rat: concordance with clinical stimulantandalcoholaddictions.AAPSJ.,9(1):E1–E10.
studies.Synapse,30(1):107–111. Rothman, R.B., Blough, B.E., Woolverton, W.L., Anderson,
Roberts, D.C., Phelan, R., Hodges, L.M., Hodges, M.M., K.G., Negus, S.S., Mello, N.K., Roth, B.L. and Baumann,
Bennett, B., Childers, S. and Davies, H. (1999) Self- M.H.(2005)Developmentofarationallydesigned,lowabuse
administrationofcocaineanalogsbyrats.Psychopharmacol- potential,biogenicaminereleaserthatsuppressescocaineself-
ogy,144(4):389–397. administration.J.Pharmacol.Exp.Ther.,313(3):1361–1369.
Rollema, H., Coe, J.W., Chambers, L.K., Hurst, R.S., Stahl, Rothman,R.B.,Clark,R.D.,Partilla,J.S.andBaumann,M.H.
S.M. and Williams, K.E. (2007) Rationale, pharmacology (2003a) (+)-Fenfluramine and its major metabolite,
andclinicalefficacyofpartialagonistsofalpha4beta2nACh (+)-norfenfluramine,arepotentsubstratesfornorepinephrine
receptors for smoking cessation. Trends Pharmacol. Sci., transporters.J.Pharmacol.Exp.Ther.,305(3):1191–1199.
28(7):316–325. Rothman,R.B.,Jayanthi,S.,Wang,X.,Dersch,C.M.,Cadet,
Rose,S.,Hunt,S.,Collins,P.,Hindmarsh,J.G.andJenner,P. J.L.,Prisinzano,T.,Rice,K.C.andBaumann,M.H.(2003b)
(1996) Repeated administration of escalating high doses of High-dose fenfluramine administration decreases serotonin
dexfenfluramine does not produce morphological evidence transporter binding, but not serotonin transporter protein
for neurotoxicity in the cortex of rats. Neurodegeneration, levels,inratforebrain.Synapse,50(3):233–239.
5(2):145–152. Rothman, R.B., Elmer, G.I., Shippenberg, T.S., Rea, W. and
Rossetti, Z.L., Hmaidan, Y. and Gessa, G.L. (1992) Marked Baumann, M.H. (1998) Phentermine and fenfluramine:
inhibitionofmesolimbicdopaminerelease:acommonfeature preclinical studies in animal models of cocaine addiction.
of ethanol, morphine, cocaine and amphetamine abstinence Ann.N.Y.Acad.Sci.,844:59–74.
inrats.Eur.J.Pharmacol.,221(2–3):227–234. Rothman, R.B., Gendron, T.M. and Hitzig, P. (1994)
Roth,B.L.(2007)Drugsandvalvularheartdisease.N.Engl.J. Combined use of fenfluramine and phentermine in the
Med.,356(1):6–9. treatment of cocaine addiction: a pilot case series.J. Subst.
Rothman, R.B. and Baumann, M.H. (2008) Appetite suppre- AbuseTreat.,11(3):273–275.
ssants,cardiacvaluediseaseandcombinationpharmacother- Rudnick, G. (1997) Mechanisms of biogenic amine transpor-
apy.Am.J.Ther.,inpress. ters.In:ReithM.E.A.(Ed.),NeurotransmitterTransporters:
Rothman, R.B., Ayestas, M.A., Dersch, C.M. and Baumann, Structure,FunctionandRegulation.HumanaPress,Totowa
M.H.(1999)Aminorex,fenfluramine,andchlorphentermine NJ,pp.73–100.
areserotonintransportersubstrates:implicationsforprimary Sachdev, M., Miller, W.C., Ryan, T. and Jollis, J.G. (2002)
pulmonaryhypertension.Circulation,100(8):869–875. Effectoffenfluramine-derivativedietpillsoncardiacvalves:a
Rothman, R.B. and Baumann, M.H. (2002) Therapeutic and meta-analysisofobservationalstudies.Am.HeartJ.,144(6):
adverseactionsofserotonintransportersubstrates.Pharma- 1065–1073.
col.Ther.,95(1):73–88. Setola, V., Hufeisen, S.J., Grande-Allen, K.J., Vesely, I.,
Rothman, R.B. and Baumann, M.H. (2003) Monoamine Glennon,R.A.,Blough,B.,Rothman,R.B.andRoth,B.L.
transportersandpsychostimulantdrugs.Eur.J.Pharmacol., (2003) 3,4-Methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA,
479(1–3):23–40. ‘‘Ecstasy’’)inducesfenfluramine-likeproliferativeactionson

## Page 22

406
human cardiac valvular interstitial cells in vitro. Mol. Volkow, N.D. and Li, T.K. (2004) Drug addiction: the
Pharmacol.,63(6):1223–1229. neurobiologyofbehaviourgoneawry.Nat.Rev.Neurosci.,
Setola, V. and Roth, B.L. (2005) Screening the receptorome 5(12):963–970.
reveals molecular targets responsible for drug-induced side Volkow, N.D., Wang, G.J., Fowler, J.S., Logan, J., Gatley,
effects: focus on ‘fen-phen’. Expert Opin. Drug Metab. S.J., Hitzemann, R., Chen, A.D., Dewey, S.L. and Pappas,
Toxicol.,1(3):377–387. N.(1997)Decreasedstriataldopaminergicresponsivenessin
Seuwen,K.,Magnaldo,I.andPouyssegur,J.(1988)Serotonin detoxifiedcocaine-dependentsubjects.Nature,386(Apr.24):
stimulates DNA synthesis in fibroblasts acting through 830–833.
5-HT1BreceptorscoupledtoaGi-protein.Nature,335(Sept. Walsh, S.L., Haberny, K.A. and Bigelow, G.E. (2000)
15):254–256. Modulation of intravenous cocaine effects by chronic
Shearer,J.,Wodak,A.,VanBeek,I.,Mattick,R.P.andLewis, oral cocaine in humans. Psychopharmacology, 150(4):
J. (2003) Pilot randomized double blind placebo-controlled 361–373.
studyofdexamphetamineforcocainedependence.Addiction, Wee, S., Anderson, K.G., Baumann, M.H., Rothman, R.B.,
98(8):1137–1141. Blough, B.E. and Woolverton, W.L. (2005) Relationship
Sitte, H.H. and Freissmuth, M. (2003) Oligomer formation betweentheserotonergicactivityandreinforcingeffectsofa
by Na+-Cl(cid:2)-coupled neurotransmitter transporters. Eur. J. series of amphetamine analogs. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther.,
Pharmacol.,479(1–3):229–236. 313(2):848–854.
Smith,F.L.,Yu,D.S.,Smith,D.G.,Leccese,A.P.andLyness, Weiss, F., Parsons, L.H., Schulteis, G., Hyytia, P., Lorang,
W.H. (1986) Dietary tryptophan supplements attenuate M.T., Bloom, F.E. and Koob, G.F. (1996) Ethanol self-
amphetamine self-administration in the rat. Pharmacol. administrationrestoreswithdrawal-associateddeficienciesin
Biochem.Behav.,25(4):849–855. accumbal dopamine and 5-hydroxytryptamine release in
Steinbusch, H.W. (1981) Distribution of serotonin-immuno- dependentrats.J.Neurosci.,16(10):3474–3485.
reactivityinthecentralnervoussystemoftherat-cellbodies White,J.M.andLopatko,O.V.(2007)Opioidmaintenance:a
andterminals.Neuroscience,6(4):557–618. comparative review of pharmacological strategies. Expert
Steranka, L.R. and Sanders-Bush, E. (1979) Long-term Opin.Pharmacother.,8(1):1–11.
effects of fenfluramine on central serotonergic mechanisms. Wojnicki,F.H.E.,Rothman,R.B.,Rice,K.C.andGlowa,J.R.
Neuropharmacology,18(11):895–903. (1999) Effects of phentermine on responding maintained
Sulzer,D.,Sonders,M.S.,Poulsen,N.W.andGalli,A.(2005) undermultiplefixed-ratioschedulesoffood-presentationand
Mechanismsofneurotransmitterreleasebyamphetamines:a cocaine-delivery in the rhesus monkey. J. Pharmacol. Exp.
review.Prog.Neurobiol.,75(6):406–433. Ther.,288(2):550–560.
Torres, G.E. and Amara, S.G. (2007) Glutamate and mono- Yu, Y.L., Fisher, H., Sekowski, A. and Wagner, G.C. (1997)
aminetransporters:newvisionsofformandfunction.Curr. Amphetamine and fenfluramine suppress ethanol intake in
Opin.Neurobiol.,17(3):304–312. ethanol-dependentrats.Alcohol,14(1):45–48.
Uhl, G.R. and Johnson, P.S. (1994) Neurotransmitter trans- Zaczek,R.,Battaglia,G.,Culp,S.,Appel,N.M.,Contrera,J.F.
porters:threeimportantgenefamiliesforneuronalfunction. and De Souza, E.B. (1990) Effects of repeated fenflura-
J.Exp.Biol.,196(1):229–236. mineadministrationonindicesofmonoaminefunctioninrat
Ungerstedt,U.(1971)Stereotaxicmappingofthemonoamine brain: pharmacokinetic, dose response, regional specificity
pathwaysintheratbrain.ActaPhysiol.Scand.Suppl.,367: and time course data. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther., 253(1):
1–48. 104–112.
Vickers, S.P., Clifton, P.G., Dourish, C.T. and Tecott, L.H. Zolkowska, D., Baumann, M.H. and Rothman, R.B. (2008)
(1999)ReducedsatiatingeffectofD-fenfluramineinserotonin Chronic fenfluramine administration increases plasma ser-
5-HT(2C) receptor mutant mice. Psychopharmacology, otonin(5-HT)tonon-toxiclevels.J.Pharmacol.Exp.Ther.,
143(3):309–314. 324(2):791–797.
Volkow, N.D., Fowler, J.S. and Wang, G.J. (2002) Role of Zolkowska, D., Rothman, R.B. and Baumann, M.H. (2006)
dopamine in drug reinforcement and addiction in humans: Amphetamine analogs increase plasma serotonin: implica-
results from imaging studies. Behav. Pharmacol., 13(5–6): tionsforcardiacandpulmonarydisease.J.Pharmacol.Exp.
355–366. Ther.,318(2):604–610.

