## Page 1

SocialHistoryofMedicineVol.18No.3&TheSocietyfortheSocialHistoryofMedicine2005,allrightsreserved.
doi:10.1093/sochis/hki045
Self-Medication and the Trade in Medicine within a
Multi-Ethnic Context: A Case Study of South Africa
from the Mid-Nineteenth to Mid-Twentieth Centuries
Byanne digby*
summary. The article analyses the distinctive experience of self-medication in South
Africa, wherethe preferences of racial and ethnic groups structureda differentiated con-
sumptionofherbs,homeandfolkremedies,patentandproprietarymedicines,andpharma-
ceuticals.Alsoexaminedaretheinterlockingagenciesofmissionaries,traders,storekeepers
andpharmacistsinthecreationofregionaldiversitywithinanevolvingmedicalmarket.The
article indicates that sufferers developed hybrid and plural forms of self-medication that
were historically and culturally variable as a result of natural and manufactured products
becoming increasingly accessible and affordable. These provided attractive substitutes
and/orcomplementstothemedicinesofboth‘western’andtraditionaldoctors.
keywords:SouthAfrica,self-medication,medicalpluralism,medicalmarket,missionary,
pharmacist, patent medicine, herb trade.
Untilcomparativelyrecently,themultiplicityofformsofhomeordomesticreme-
diesaswellasothertypesofself-medicationhaveattractedlimitedscholarlyatten-
tion. However, during the last decade the historiography on self-medication has
grown so that we are much better informed for several countries.1 For South
Africatherehasbeenaslowaccumulationofinterestingcontributionsonparticu-
laraspectsofalargeandcomplexfield.2Buttherehasbeennoanalysisoftheway
in which a growing market emerged in natural and manufactured products suit-
ableforself-medicationbydifferentracialandethnicgroupsinSouthAfrica.This
case study discusses the interconnected agencies involved in this process.
AslowgrowthinSouthAfrican‘western’trainedpractitionersandtheirheavy
concentration in urban areas—where six out of seven doctors resided in 1911—
meantthatotherformsofmedicineremainedstrong,especiallyforruralsufferers.3
* Centre for Health, Medicine and Society, School of Arts and Humanities, Oxford Brookes
University,GipsyLane,OxfordOX3OBP,UK.E-mail:adigby@brookes.ac.uk
1For example, J. K. Crellin, Home Medicine: The Newfoundland Experience (Montreal, 1994);
C. E. Rosenberg (ed.), Right Living, and Anglo American Tradition of Self-Help Medicine and Hygiene
(Baltimore, 2003); D. Craig, Familiar Medicine: Everyday Health Knowledge and Practice in Today’s
Vietnam(Honolulu,2000).
2E.H.Burrows,AHistoryofMedicineinSouthAfricauptotheEndoftheNineteenthCentury(Cape
Town,1958),pp.191–4;M.Ryan,AHistoryofOrganisedPharmacy,1885–1950(CapeTown,1986);
E. Lastovica, ‘Sequah, a Quack in Nineteenth-Century Cape Town’, Cabo, 4 (1987); D. Gordon,
‘FromRitualsofRapturetoDependence:ThePoliticalEconomyofKhoikhoiNarcoticConsump-
tion’, South African Historical Journal, 35 (1996); M. Cocks and A. Dold, ‘The Role of “African
Chemists”intheHealthCareSystemoftheEasternCapeProvinceofSouthAfrica’,SocialScience
andMedicine,51(2000).
3Governmentpapers,UG32-1912,Censusof1911.PartV,Occupations,pp.706–7;H.Deacon,
H. Phillips, and E. van Heyningen, The Cape Doctor in the Nineteenth Century (London, 2004),
pp.36–7.
0951–631XSocialHistoryofMedicineVol.18No.3pp.439–457
Downloaded
from
https://academic.oup.com/shm/article/18/3/439/1691499
by
Universite
Aix-Marseille
2
user
on
27
October
2023

## Page 2

440 Anne Digby
Here healers or traditional doctors had long practised one form of indigenous
medicine, attracting perhaps four out of five black sufferers as well as a handful
ofwhitepatients.But,forbothblackandwhite,anexpandingrangeofmedicines
meant a growth in self-medication, either as a substitute or a complement to a
consultation with a ‘western’ or traditional doctor. ‘Dutch’ medicines and folk
remedies formed a distinctive domestic medicine for members of Afrikaner (of
Dutch, German, and French origin) farm households; patent medicines retailed
in country stores to customers from every ethnic group; medicinal plants were
sold by itinerant traders to African and coloured (the official category for those
of mixed race) purchasers; herbal and manufactured medicines attracted black
and white customers through mail order; and medicines retailed in pharmacies
to an urban—predominantly white—elite.4
South Africa’s historical experience of self-medication had some similarities
with other countries. As in Britain, where there was a tenfold increase in the
salesofpatentmedicineduringthelatenineteenthandearlytwentiethcenturies,
enthusiastic promotion by suppliers interacted with consumers’ predilection for
self-medication.5 And like another country with a huge rural interior, the
UnitedStatesofAmerica,‘snake-oil’andsimilarquackremediesweresoldtogul-
lible inhabitants in areas lacking trained health care practitioners.6 From another
cross-cultural perspective, South Africa had similarities with Japan in its dual
system of ‘western’ and indigenous medicine. Some Japanese sufferers adhered
to Kampo or traditional Japanese medicine, and bought their herbs for self-
medicationfromtraditionalpharmaciesinKyoto(theurbancentreofthemoun-
tainous district that supplied herbs), or from traders who carried herbal remedies
tosellinotherpartsofJapan.7InJapan,asinSouthAfrica,aherbtradecontinued
to be important.
SouthAfrica’sexperiencewasdistinctive,however,andmuchofthissingularity
resulted from the diverse racial and ethnic groupswhose preferences structured a
differentiatedmedicine.Theircomposition,sizeanddistributionarethereforerel-
evant to this article’s analysis. Table 1 indicates that by far the largest racial group
was African and, according to the 1904 census (the first to specify it separately),
comprised two-thirds of the total population. This proportion continued until
mid-century. Charles Feinstein’s estimates for the earlier size of this African or
Bantu group suggest between 1,500,000 (lower bound) and 3,000,000 (upper
bound) for the mid-nineteenth century, with even the lower figure nearly ten
times the size of the white population. For the Khoisan, the census of 1865
suggestedasmallgroupof50,000people,butbythattimeitwasdifficulttosep-
arate them from the broader coloured or mixed race population. In 1904 the
coloured population made up about one in twelve of the South African
4Thisformedanestimated15percentofthepopulation.SeeD.W.Goyns,PharmacyintheTrans-
vaal,1894–1994(Braamfontein,1995),p.96.
5A.Digby,MakingaMedicalLiving(Cambridge,1994),pp.39–41.
6P.Starr,TheSocialTransformationofAmericanMedicine(NewYork,1982);J.H.Young,TheMedical
Messiahs(Princeton,1967).
7M.M.Lock,EastAsianMedicineinUrbanJapan(Berkeley,1980)pp.97–8,135,145–7,151–2.
Downloaded
from
https://academic.oup.com/shm/article/18/3/439/1691499
by
Universite
Aix-Marseille
2
user
on
27
October
2023

## Page 3

Self-Medication and Trade in Medicine in South Africa 441
Table 1.PopulationofSouthAfricabyRacialGroup,1904–2000
Year African% White% Coloured% Asian% Total(millions)
1904 67.4 21.6 8.6 2.4 5.19
1910 67.3 21.4 8.8 2.6 5.88
1920 67.7 21.9 7.9 2.4 6.84
1930 68.9 20.9 7.9 2.3 8.68
1940 69.7 20.0 8.0 2.3 10.75
1950 69.3 19.5 8.5 2.7 13.60
2000 79.0 9.6 8.9 2.5 44.07
Source:TakenfromC.H.Feinstein,AnEconomicHistoryofSouthAfrica(Cambridge,2005),tableA1.3.
Table 2.WhitePopulationofSouthAfrica,1855–1904(thousands)
OrangeFree
Year Cape Natal State Transvaal S.Africa
1798 21.7 — — — 21.7
1832 66.0 — — — 66.0
1855 112.0 8.5 15.0 25.0 161.0
1865 181.6 17.0 21.0 33.0 252.0
1875 236.8 18.6 27.0 40.0 342.0
1880 — 25.3 61.0 50.0 —
1891 377.0 46.8 77.7 119.1 632.0
1904 579.7 97.1 142.7 297.3 1,116.8
Source:TakenfromFeinstein,AnEconomicHistoryofSouthAfrica,tableA1.1.
populationandthisproportionremainedstablefortherestofthecentury.Table2
indicatesofficialfigures(togetherwithsomerelatedestimates)forthewhitepopu-
lationindifferentpartsofthecountryduringthenineteenthcentury.Table1indi-
cates that whites formed about one-fifth of the total population during the first
half of the twentieth century.8 Within the white population were the two main
ethnicities of the English and the Afrikaners, with approximately 60 per cent of
the white group being Afrikaner.9 The forms of self-medication accessible to
these groups were shaped by differential rates of urbanization. The 1931 census
showed only two-fifths of whites but more than three-quarters of other races
lived in rural areas.10
Missionaries and Medical Commerce
Missionariesplayedasignificantearlyroleinfosteringthegrowthofruralmedical
consumerism amongst the coloured and African population because, in a shared
ground between missions and colonial society, there was ‘explicit association of
8C. H. Feinstein, An Economic History of South Africa: Conquest, Dispossession and Development
(Cambridge,2005),pp.252–6.
9H.Giliomee,TheAfrikaners(CapeTown,2003),p.xiii.
10C.G.W.Schumann,StructuralChangesandBusinessCyclesinSouthAfrica,1806–1936(London,
1938),p.146.
Downloaded
from
https://academic.oup.com/shm/article/18/3/439/1691499
by
Universite
Aix-Marseille
2
user
on
27
October
2023

## Page 4

442 Anne Digby
Christianity, commerce and civilisation’.11 Mission evangelism directed at the
African and coloured population was framed by the desirability of spreading
western values, introducing material goods, and creating customers for imperial
manufactured goods. That early missionaries effected cures from bottles in their
medicalchestsfocusedattentiononmedicaments.InwhatLandauhastermedsur-
gicalevangelism,successfulsurgicaloperationswerealsoimportantinpublicizing
thepowerof‘western’medicine.12BeckhasshownforsouthernAfricamoregen-
erally how pioneering missionaries bartered goods to ‘encourage conversion, as
payment for services, and as presents for African leaders’, so gradually creating
dependency on European material goods.13
Traders appreciated the effect that nineteenth-century missionaries had on a
general propensity to consume. A Mafikeng dealer commented that ‘The
traders ... have the best reason to be gratified by the progress of Christianity,
for as soon as a native becomes a Christian ... the demand for foreign goods is
greatly stimulated’.14 Within a developing commercial economy, Colin Bundy
has highlighted the extent to which market relations penetrated African areas
from the 1870s to 1890s, creating newand permanent wants in the African pea-
santry.15Eveninthemid-twentiethcenturythecontrast—betweentheChristian,
or so-called ‘school’ Africans, and the ‘red’ or ‘heathen’ Africans—was still
noticeable in their patterns of consumption, with the former purchasing many
more ‘European’ manufactured goods.16
TheMoravianswerealreadycommittedtotradewhentheyarrivedintheCape
to minister to a coloured population recently emancipated from slavery. The
mission came from Germany where the Halle Orphanage had manufactured
pharmaceuticals, and used its profits to finance Pietist missionary activity with
an explicit duty to treat sickness. A standard Halle product was the small physic
or medicine chest containing about a dozen products along with popular texts
to explain their use.17 In 1849 Rudolph Roser came out to the Moravian
Mission at Genadendal in the western Cape and was licensed as an apothecary.18
The official notice in the Government Gazette was followed bya personal recom-
mendationfromamemberoftheColonialMedicalCouncil,MrC.F.Juritz,who
operated the Cape depot for ‘Dutch medicines’ imported from the Orphan
11A.Porter,‘Religion,MissionaryEnthusiasmandEmpire’,inA.Porter(ed.),TheOxfordHistory
oftheBritishEmpire.TheNineteenthCentury(Oxford,1999),p.231.
12M.Gelfand,ChristianDoctorandNurse(Sandton,1984);J.L.andJ.Comaroff,OfRevelationand
Revolution,2vols(Chicago,1991–7),ch.7;P.S.Landau,‘ExplainingSurgicalEvangelisminColo-
nial Southern Africa: Teeth, Pain and Faith’, Journal of African History, 37 (1996); C. Allwood,
‘MissionasHealingtheSick:ChristianMedicalMissionariesinSouthAfrica’,Missionalia,17(1989).
13R. B. Beck, ‘Bibles and Beads: Missionaries as Traders in Southern Africa in the Early
NineteenthCentury’,JournalofAfricanHistory,30(1989),pp.213,225.
14LondonMissionarySocietyChronicle(1902),264.
15C.Bundy,TheRiseandFalloftheSouthAfricanPeasantry(CapeTown,1988),pp.74,91,129.
16W. D. Hammond-Tooke, Bhaca Society (Cape Town, 1962), p. 261; W. D. Hammond-Tooke,
The Tribes of the King William’s Town District (Pretoria, 1958), p. 55. The ‘Red people’ (ababomvu)
were Africans who used a mixture of red ochre and animal fat on their bodies to protect against
thecoldandsunburn,andwhoretainedtheirtraditionalculture.
17R.Wilson,PiousTradersinMedicine(Philadelphia,2000),pp.63,67–71,78,122–3,127–8.
18GovernmentGazette,30August1849.
Downloaded
from
https://academic.oup.com/shm/article/18/3/439/1691499
by
Universite
Aix-Marseille
2
user
on
27
October
2023

## Page 5

Self-Medication and Trade in Medicine in South Africa 443
HouseatHalle.19AnobviousinferencewasthatJuritzhopedtosupplymedicines
toRoser,andthuswouldbenefitfromapotentialmarketwithinthemissionand
its hinterland.20
The Moravian mission stores at Mamre, Elim, Genadendal and elsewhere
displayed a linkage between religion, trade, and medicine, with even a Moravian
Mission Trading Company between 1935 and 1952. The store at Genadendal
had a poster of ‘Sound Remedies for Sick People. The Trader’s Handy Guide
Chart’.21 The chart listed ailments that the customer might complain of, and
alongside these conditions suggested commercial remedies. Beginning with
‘acidity’,forwhichRajahStomachMixtureorGraham’sGingerCurefor infants
was appropriate, it worked its way alphabetically through another 61 ailments—
including not onlyeveryday predicaments such as constipation, ear ache, or sore
throat,butlesscommonafflictionssuchasgoutandscrofula—beforefinallyreach-
ing‘weakness’,forwhichViratapills,orVirnilTonicandStrengtheningPillswere
recommended.ThatGrahamRemediesprintedanddistributedthisindicatesthe
widespread retail trade in patent medicines conducted not only in missions but
in stores more generally, and the extensive use of self-medication by local Cape
consumers—thecolouredfarmlabourersandAfrikanerfarmhouseholds.
Traders and Storekeepers
Thestorekeeperandthetravellingtraderbecameimportantsourcesofmedicines
for the independent rural consumer. A useful insight into the itinerant trader’s
activities can be gained by looking at complaints of unfair competition by
apothecaries and doctors in memorials to the Cape Colonial Medical
Council.22Onewrotein1846that‘itisnearlyimpossibleforme...becausemer-
chants here order and sell continually ... quantities of medicine of most every
description from Cape Town and other places—Messrs Juritz and Kunhardt I
think are the greatest suppliers of travelling merchants’.23 Another insinuated
that some members of the Colonial Medical Committee—such as Juritz—had
concealed conflicts of interest, and thus favoured a relaxation in country areas
of the regulation whereby apothecaries dispensed drugs, because it would be to
their private advantage.24 Frequently informing such protests and counterclaims
were rival professional and economic interests—sometimes aligned with a less
visible counterpoint of diverse ethnic identities because the English showed
little appreciation of Hallische or ‘Dutch’ medicines. Traders counter-attacked
by protesting that the law was unduly restrictive, and that drug sales were both
19National Archives, Cape Town, CO 4055, Memorials of 1850; Cape of Good Hope Almanac
(1843);Volksblad,25Januaryand1February1850.
20CO4055,MemorialfromDrOrpen,8February1850.
21B. Kru¨ger, The Pear Tree Blossoms (Genadendal, 1966), pp. 56–7, 181; B. Kru¨ger and
P.W.Schaberg,ThePearTreeBearsFruit(Genadendal,1984),pp.65,43–4,113.
22NationalArchives,CapeTown,MC3,MedicalCommittee,27June1842;Burrows,Medicine,
p.155.
23NationalArchives,CapeTown,CO4029,document368,30March1846.
24NationalArchives,CapeTown,MC10,letterstoMedicalCouncil,8December1848.
Downloaded
from
https://academic.oup.com/shm/article/18/3/439/1691499
by
Universite
Aix-Marseille
2
user
on
27
October
2023

## Page 6

444 Anne Digby
necessary and effective: Hallische medicines, they argued, ‘are usually purchased
and used by the inhabitants of country districts, manyof whom live at a distance
of one hundred miles from any professional assistance’.25
Thisgrowingtradeinmedicineswasviewedambivalentlybythecolonialautho-
rities. The presence of a powerful rural interest group in the Cape Parliament
meantthatthesectionalinterestsofpharmacistswerenoteffectivelyprotectedby
lawagainst sales of medicine by itinerant traders or storekeepers. During the late
nineteenthandearlytwentiethcenturiesitineranttradingexpanded—particularly
that by Jewish smouses or hawkers who took in as many rural households and
farms as possible.26 In the Transvaal during the 1880s an unusual Irishwoman,
Mrs Heckford, became a travelling trader and her autobiographical account
showshowatraderwouldchangestocktoanticipatefreshdemandsfromdifferent
ethnicgroups.27Amongstthemedicinalgoodsstockedbyitinerantsfromthe1880s
to1900swereindigenousherbssuchasbuchuanddagga,aswellasrooibostea.28
Gradually, the activities of the itinerant trader were supplemented by the
general storekeeper. Some of the smouse who had sold ‘Dutch’ medicines them-
selves graduated to ownership of country stores, as in Namaqualand, where
their stores had groceries shelved on the left and medicines on the right.29
Taking pride in being ‘Universal Providers’, storekeepers obtained patent medi-
cines from urban pharmaceutical firms.30 Ease of supply, together with buoyant
demand, ensured that a rising number stocked medicines, and by the early
1930s as many as one in five general dealers had a licence to sell them.31 Albert
JacksonkeptstoresinthenorthernCapebetween1899and1902,andrecollected
that ‘Remedies of every description formed no small proportion of a country
store’s goods, especially the old “Dutch” medicines’.32 Druppels or drops made
up in a tincture in a small bottle were the staple of these ‘Dutch’remedies, and
in 1906 the Rand Daily Mail remarked on the large supply of these drops that
invariably occupied much of the shelf room in country stores.33 In addition,
patent medicines such as ‘Nature’s Health Restorer’ sold well in general dealer
outlets in the Transvaal.34
25MC 7, Colonial Office to Medical Council, 1821-5, memorial from drug vendors, 20 May
1824.
26M.Steyn,TheDiaryofaSouthAfrican(CapeTown,1919),p.116.
27Mrs Heckford, A Lady Trader in the Transvaal (London, 1882), p. 258; V. Allen, Lady Trader
(London,1979),pp.130,175,179.
28A.Jackson,TraderontheVeld(CapeTown,1958),p.36.
29P.JowellandA.Folb,IntoKokerboomCountry.Namaqualand’sJewishPioneers(CapeTown,2005),
pp.12,35–8.
30W.F.Fish,TheAutobiographyofaCounterJumper(London,1929),p.179;Steyn,DiaryofaSouth
African, pp. 200–2; P. W. Laidler and M. Gelfand, South Africa. Its Medical History, 1652–1898
(Cape Town, 1971), p. 308; South African Medical Journal, I (1884), 126; III (1895–6), 127; Cape
Almanac,1847.
31PersonalcommunicationfromMervynSusseronhisfamily’stradingstoreinthenorthernTrans-
vaal; South African Medical Journal, II (1887), 119; Ryan, Pharmacy, pp. 69–70, 95; Government
Ordinances12and82;Burrows,Medicine,p.82.
32Jackson,Trader,pp.30,62.
33RandDailyMail,1March1906.
34Goyns,Pharmacy,p.26.
Downloaded
from
https://academic.oup.com/shm/article/18/3/439/1691499
by
Universite
Aix-Marseille
2
user
on
27
October
2023

## Page 7

Self-Medication and Trade in Medicine in South Africa 445
Amongst the principal patrons of the store were the farm households of the
Dutch or Boers (termed Afrikaners from around the 1870s.) Most Afrikaners
werefarmersandtheAfrikanerfarm,asGilomeehasaptlydescribedit,wasa‘vir-
tually autonomous social domain’.35 Fending for oneself involved an eclectic
‘settler’ medicine centred on ‘Dutch’ medicines, supplemented first by local
herbal and folk remedies, and later by the local store’s patent and proprietary
medicines. The ‘housewife doctor’ used a variety of herbal remedies, some
learned from the Khoisan, which ranged from buchu tea for weak kidneys, to
wormwoodintheshoesforaweakheart.Herchoiceofremedieswasfrequently
assistedbyahouseholdguidetoself-medication,suchasD.J.Smal’sDieAfrikaanse
Huisdokter [The Afrikaner Home Doctor].36 Animal folk remedies were also
employed during sickness, as in the Colesberg area, where ‘for fits the old
people used dog’s blood, for measles goat’s dung, for a sore throat wolf’s
dung’.37Remedieswereusedeclecticallyandsymptomatically,sothatifonetreat-
ment did not answer, then resort was had to another. During the South African
War, retention of traditional cultural practices in thecamps becamean important
elementinAfrikanerpoliticalidentity.Thiswasshownbyamother’sdesiretoheal
her children (for example, through wrapping them in soothing eucalyptus leaves
during fever), against a British army doctor’s advice to send them to the camp
hospital.38
An additional health care ‘resource’ were the quacks who were common not
only in rural but also in urban areas. Amongst them were the travelling Sequah
who, as Latovica has shown, promoted American Indian medicines in large
towns during the 1890s. Theypresented the evidence of theircures for rheuma-
tism through publishing sufferers’testimonials in newspaper advertisements, and
by exhibiting clients in ‘before and after’ appearances before large audiences.
Despite their popularity, both Sequah Oil and Prairie Flower Mixture were
made up only of turpentine, fish oil, and a little camphor.39 Quacks continued
to practise into the early twentieth century, usually concentrating on illnesses
where registered doctors achieved little (for example, the ‘cancer-curer’).40
General trading stations run by whites assumedan important role in supplying
itemsforself-medicationtoAfricans.Asearlyasthe1850sand1860s,fiftytrading
stations had been established beyond the eastern frontier of the Cape—from
PondolandnorthwardstotheborderwithNatal.Thesetradedimportedmanufac-
tured goods for local pastoral and agricultural products.41 A colonial doctor
35Giliomee,Afrikaners,pp.xix,37,320.
36R.Melzer,‘TheHousewifeDoctor’,AdlerMuseumBulletin,9April1983,1–2.
37QuotedinBurrows,Medicine,p.187.
38R. Van Reenen (ed.), Emily Hobhouse (2nd edn, Cape Town, 2000), pp. 76, 93, 95; E. van
Heyningen,‘Women and Disease: The Clash of MedicalCultures’,inRethinking theSouth African
War(forthcoming).
39Lastovica,‘Sequah’,pp.10–18.
40Burrows,Medicine,pp.153,155–6,257;Governmentpaper,UG6-1927,ReportoftheDepart-
mentofPublicHealth,1925–6,p.192.
41W. Beinart, The Political Economy of Pondoland, 1860–1930 (Cambridge, 1982), pp. 23, 27;
S. Marks and A. Atmore (eds), Economy and Society in Pre-Industrial South Africa (London, 1980),
p.144.
Downloaded
from
https://academic.oup.com/shm/article/18/3/439/1691499
by
Universite
Aix-Marseille
2
user
on
27
October
2023

## Page 8

446 Anne Digby
observed that Africans ‘purchase our [European] medicines freely’ at these
stores.42 By the 1880s, the Bouverie brothers had become the major wholesale
traders in the area, and my analysis of their invoices shows them supplying
medicines including Holloway’s Ointment, painkillers such as Chlorodyne or
laudanum, along with laxatives such as Epsom salts or Sarsaparilla. Twenty years
later, patented medicines had become more conspicuous so that Enos fruit salts,
Beecham’s powders, Carter’s little liver pills, and Phospherine were being sold,
as well as a wider range of general medicines including bottles of embrocation,
eucalyptus oil, and asafoetida.43 In Bizana in eastern Pondoland, William Saville
Lewis was retailing goods and medicines in the same period, amongst which
was a ‘blood purifier’ called ‘Pink Pills for Pale People’ that was popular
amongst African consumers.44 Like the Bouveries, Lewis also stocked Phospher-
ine (whose manufacturers trumpeted its efficacy for everything from
nervous debility to malaria and rheumatism), and extended the self-medication
range by supplying Wood’s peppermint cure, as well as castor oil. That he
sold medicine was well-known in the neighbourhood, since the local magistrate
sent him a copy of legislation of 1908/9, which attempted unsuccessfully
to impose a stamp duty on patent and proprietary medicines.45 In remote
rural areas such as this, an association of the trading store with medicine was
cemented by the mission hospital later running an out-patient clinic in a room
at the store.46
The Bouveries’ trade was financed from London and supplied via a Durban
merchant,47 while Lewis had credit linkswith Durban wholesalers and merchant
houses.48 Just as these Pondoland traders were overwhelmingly dependent on
wholesalers based in Natal, so Jackson in the northern Cape was dependent on
his Port Elizabeth supplier in the eastern Cape. And wholesalers up the coast in
East London supplied retail trading stores in the Ciskei hinterland.49 This exten-
sive network of trading communication, linking remoter rural areas to major
urban ones, facilitated an increasing range of consumer goods—including medi-
cines—in country stores.
Stores were situated every five to seven miles in order to induce African con-
sumptionofEuropeanmanufacturedgoods.‘Moststoresdoalargetradeinpatent
medicines’,commentedMonicaHunterofPondolandduringthe1930s,while20
yearslaterW.D.Hammond-TookenotedthattradersintheremoteMountFrere
42Capeofficialpapers,G13-1888,ReportsofDistrictSurgeon,p.53.
43NationalArchives,CapeTown,A1403,O’Donnellaccountbooksfor1886–9and1901–6.
44NationalArchives,CapeTown,A2044,WilliamSavilleLewis,receiptof7November1906.
45NationalArchives,CapeTown,A2044,Lewis,receipts12October1908;29January,19June,9
September1909;18January1910.
46UniversityofYork,BorthwickInstitute,Galepapers,‘NotesontheHistoryoftheChurchof
ScotlandHospitalatTugelaFerry’,n.d.
47W. Beinart, ‘European Traders and the Mpondo Paramountcy, 1878–1886’, Journal of African
History,20(1979),474–5.
48Jackson,Trader,p.47.
49D. Hobart Houghton (ed.), Economic Development in a Plural Society (Oxford, 1960), p. 91;
D. Hobart Houghton and E. M. Walton, The Economy of a Native Reserve (Pietermaritzburg,
1952),p.66.
Downloaded
from
https://academic.oup.com/shm/article/18/3/439/1691499
by
Universite
Aix-Marseille
2
user
on
27
October
2023

## Page 9

Self-Medication and Trade in Medicine in South Africa 447
area stocked patent medicines for their Bhaca clientele.50 Also in the 1950s, the
Keiskammahoek Rural Survey (covering over one million people in the Ciskei)
quantifiedexpendituresoflocalconsumerstofindthatmedicinesandtoiletrequi-
sitescomprisedbetween1and2percentofsales.51Andbeyondthenorth-eastern
frontier of the Union, in the Bechuanaland Protectorate, Schapera showed how
patent medicines were found in the trading stores of African reserves during
the 1940s. These included Kyalami heart tonic and headache powders. ‘Even
the poorest household tries to provide itself with ... various patent medicines’.
Indeed, one store’s inventory showed that ‘patent medicines increased about 30
per cent since 1932’. An important force driving consumerism was large-scale,
migrant labour, since black miners who had worked on the Rand acquired
new knowledge in the Transvaal about non-indigenous medicines and brought
home bottles of medicine, Vaseline, and embrocation.52
The Pharmaceutical Business
The difference betweena general trading store (that sold patentandherbal-based
medicines amongst a large range of general goods), and a chemist’s shop (that
extended business into all-purpose goods), was not as great as their respective
labels might suggest. The business of an early chemist—at least in rural dis-
tricts—appears to have been partly general commercial activity and partly phar-
macy, with the latter extending into medical matters more properly the
province of the licensed doctor. The daybook of J. Williams of Brakfontein,
near Somerset East in the eastern Cape, indicated that, during the early 1860s,
he sold general goods to local inhabitants—from tobacco to a psalm book or
even a horse. In his central business as a chemist and druggist he supplied pills
and liniments, mixtures, anodynes, and powders and made up individual
recipes.But healsostrayedintomedicalterritorybygiving‘adviceandprescrip-
tion’, or paying visits to clients’ homes.53
From 1807, the Cape Colonial Medical Committee had regulated pharma-
ceutical businesses such as that in Brakfontein, until a separate Cape Pharmacy
Board was set up in 1892. The committee allocated to apothecaries (later
termed chemists and druggists), the dispensing, preparation, and selling of medi-
cines, and reserved the right of the committee to inspect chemists’ shops.
Numbers of licensed pharmacists in the Cape grew from little more than a
dozenin1840to266halfacenturylater.54Sinceretailpharmacyhadarestricted
entry(becauseoftheneedforalicensedpharmacistonthepremises),itremained
relatively lucrative.55 In contrast to a rural chemist, a town pharmacy
50M.Hunter,ReactionstoConquest(CapeTown,1979),pp.140,305–6;HammondTooke,Bhaca
Society,pp.29,296.
51HoughtonandWalton,NativeReserve,p.80;D.HobartHoughton,LifeintheCiskei(Johannes-
burg,1955),pp.34–5.
52I.Schapera,MigrantLabourandTribalLife(Oxford,1947),pp.122,125–6,229,231,237–8.
53UniversityofCapeTownArchives,BC217,box4,daybookofJ.E.J.Williams,1862–4.
54Ryan,Pharmacy,pp.1–9,31,33,37–8.
55Houghton,EconomicDevelopment,p.113.
Downloaded
from
https://academic.oup.com/shm/article/18/3/439/1691499
by
Universite
Aix-Marseille
2
user
on
27
October
2023

## Page 10

448 Anne Digby
focusedmainlyonitscorebusiness.HowthisoperatedisrevealedbyPhilipIsaacs
who was apprenticed to Gaston’s Pharmacy in Kimberley in 1922 and worked
there until 1931. The pharmacy sold patent medicines (such as Carter’s Little
Liver Pills, Dr William’s Pink Pills for Pale People, and Graham’s Remedy), as
well as Cape Dutch Remedies, and a few herbal remedies. He recollected that
medicines for Afrikaner and English customers had much the same ingredients:
‘they just had their own particular names for them’. Isaacs reflected that
‘Gaston’swasfamousfor its...“RedMixture”...Itwasanidealthingfor influ-
enza, and we used to sell it by the bucket’.56 The prescription book shows how
the original composition of Dr Smith’s Mixture was given more power in
Gaston’s Red Mixture by increased proportions of camphor, menthol and other
ingredients, while syrup was added to make the medicine more palatable.57 This
suggests keen competition for customers in Kimberley—the focal point of the
booming Diamond Fields—where as many as 16 pharmacists were registered
under the Medical and Pharmacy Act of 1892.58 Further north, chemist shops
operated in urban centres—Johannesburg, Pretoria, and mining towns on the
Reef, although medicines were sold by itinerants in the rural Transvaal.59
Nation-wide retail pharmacies were gradually reshaped by wholesale pharma-
ceutical businesses located in Cape Town, Port Elizabeth, and Johannesburg.
Theirproductssupplantedindividuallycompoundedmedicines,sothatapharma-
ciststatedregretfullythat‘Wesimplydispensethedrugsnowandhavegivenaway
our individualrightstothemanufacturing industry’.60
In areas with a sizeable black population, pharmacists targeted African needs.
The expanding value of such custom might occasionally result in a European
pharmacist taking on an African apprentice, as happened in the Transkei in
1885 when Solomon Dinga, a young Mfengu, was indentured to James
Woolby in Engcobo.61 Pharmacists also sometimes examined African patients
or performed minor operations on them.62 Black customers liked pharmacies
because they offered prompt and courteous service—in contrast to the crowded
facilities and assembly-line treatments often later experienced in out-patient
departments of clinics and hospitals.63
Mail Order Medicine
From the late nineteenth century, the medicine trade expanded after patent
medicines (often with secret ingredients or unknown proportions of known
ingredients), joined proprietary medicines (largely with patented or registered
56InterviewwithPhilipIsaacs.
57McGregorMuseum,Kimberley,MMK4700,Gaston’sprescriptions.
58Ryan,Pharmacy,p.27,tableII.
59Goyns,Pharmacy,p.10.
60MaxFriedman,retiringCapeTownpharmacist(AtlanticSun,30August2001).
61Ryan,Pharmacy,pp.2,38.
62‘Alleged Illegal Practice by a Chemist’, South African Medical Record, 25 March 1906; ‘The
Unzimkulu Prescribing Case’, South African Medical Record, 10 May 1906; South African Medical
Journal,IV(1896–7),166.
63R.E.Phillips,TheBantuintheCity(Lovedale,1938),p.130.
Downloaded
from
https://academic.oup.com/shm/article/18/3/439/1691499
by
Universite
Aix-Marseille
2
user
on
27
October
2023

## Page 11

Self-Medication and Trade in Medicine in South Africa 449
ones), and commercial herbal medicines. This growth attracted disparaging
commentfromdoctorswhoassertedthat‘Thereisnocountry...wherethecon-
sumption of quack remedies is so high per head’.64 In reality the South African
experience was not untypical of an international situation where advertising
and leafleting stimulated a rising consumption of medicines promising physical
well-being. In an interactive process of production and consumption, producers
were attentive to sufferers’ liking for certain types of medicines, whilst at the
same time shaping and stimulating these desires into new channels that in turn
required fresh medication. In South Africa, patent medicine cures assimilated
elements from diverse medical traditions within a pluralistic medicine. Officially,
the patent medicine trade was acknowledged to be large but its full extent was
held to be unquantifiable.65
Fromthe1880surbanpharmacistsusednewspaperadvertisementstodevelopa
ruralmarket.Atfirstdirectedatawhitereadership,thisinvolvedpublicityondis-
tinctively Afrikaner medications, as well as promotion of English remedies.
Adverts roused the sufferer’s anxieties but promised sure-fire cures. The Mafeking
Mail in 1917 carried publicity from Lennon—which boasted that it had ‘up-to-
date stores of patent and Dutch remedies’—alongside more general promotions
for Beecham’s pills (‘Do not wait until your health is impaired, but take steps to
keep it up to the mark’), and Ashton and Parson’s Infant Powders (as used by
Royal Mothers for little Princes and Princesses). The East London Daily Dispatch
in 1920 promoted Eagle Pile Pills and Ointment, and ‘Gets-it’ forcorns and cal-
luses,availablefromLennonandanumberofothernamedpharmacies.However,
Jones’Rheumaticurofor neuralgiawasadvertisedasbeingobtainableonlyfroma
Cape Town mail ordercompany. In the sameyear, the Cape carried general pro-
motionsforDeWitts’kidneyandbladderpills(guaranteeing‘forthatawfulback-
ache, certain relief in 24 hours’) and Collinson’s Quinine Commando for flu or
colds, where a promise (or was it a threat?) suggested that ‘a glass in time saves
grave possibilities’.66
Fromtheclosingyearsofthenineteenthcentury,mailorderbusinessbecamean
important means of expanding this rural African trade. Here a catalyst was pro-
vided by the arrival in the Cape of the penny post by 1864, and the basis for a
South African postal union by 1883.67 Country traders often had a Post Office
Agency so that at Jackson’s Draghoender store a very large bag contained ‘a
mass ofpamphlets advertisingpatent medicineswhich thenflooded the country-
side’.68 In persuasive advertising, Dr William’s Pink Pills for Pale People were
stated to ‘make new blood at every dose’ and to be a tonic that will ‘give your
blood—and you—a New Life’.69 Even in the remote Transkei, this remedy
64B.J.F.Laubscher,‘ThePsychologyofQuackery’,JournaloftheMedicalAssociationofSouthAfrica,
1(1927),353-4.
65UG19-1936,ProprietaryMedicines,paragraph7,p.8.
66MafekingMail,14February1917,EastLondonDailyDispatch,8May1920;Cape,6August1920.
67M.H.deKock,SelectedSubjectsintheEconomicHistoryofSouthAfrica(CapeTown,1924),p.353.
68Jackson,Trader,p.26.
69BloemfonteinPost,2November1903.
Downloaded
from
https://academic.oup.com/shm/article/18/3/439/1691499
by
Universite
Aix-Marseille
2
user
on
27
October
2023

## Page 12

450 Anne Digby
found sales through mail order from Cape Town.70 Vendors relabelled remedies
hitherto sold to white purchasers under picturesque African names, promoting
them as cures for specific ailments or as universal panaceas for everything from
hearttroubletosandworms.71AdvertisementsintheAfricanpressintheTransvaal
wereplacedbyWitwatersrandchemistswhoemployedAfricancorrespondentsto
deal with respondents from each language group.72 By the 1930s a remarkable
seven-eighths of the advertising in vernacular newspapers was for postal medi-
cines.73 And during the 1940s a missionary in north Zululand found that ‘by
far the most important item sent through the parcel post to the district was
these patent medicines’.74
AnAfricanreadershipwasparticularlylikelytofindthesemailorderadvertise-
mentsattractivebecauseindigenoushealerscustomarilyusedrestorativesandrevi-
vers as well as charms to bring about general well-being and good fortune.75
Sometimes promotions were straightforward as in ‘I have opened a chemist’s
shopatMlazi.Thesemedicinesarenativemedicines,Itreatallnativeailments.’76
Others promoted their products in a more distinctive way, as with a Durban
advertisement that adopted traditional usage in focusing on culturally-related
well-beingandgoodfortuneasessentialtoholistichealth.Thelistofpricedmedi-
cines includedagroupheaded‘Medicinesof HomeControlling’ amongstwhich
was‘ForstoppageofevilspiritsR[and]10’.Alsolistedweremedicinesfor‘Good
Luck and finding Employment’, ‘Young Men to be Desired by Girls’, and ‘To
open your brain at school and to pass school exams R12’. Assorted medicines
included those for improving fertility and for casting spells.77
Duringthe1920s,theSouthAfricanUnion’sDepartmentofPublicHealthcri-
ticizedthe‘disgracefulpractices’ofcertainpharmaceuticalfirms—largelybutnot
entirely located in Natal—which promoted nostrums in advertisements and
pamphlets in African languages. These set out ‘marvellous remedies for diseases
of the generative organs or for sexual impotence or sterility; some were
claimedtoyieldaspecialodourorotherwisehaveremarkableeffectsinincreasing
sex attraction’. The authorities became concerned at the ‘large sums’ spent on
medicamentslikethese,assertingthatmany‘werequiteworthless’,andwerepro-
moted by ‘misleading and fraudulent advertisements’.78 In 1934, the General
Council of the United Transkeian Territories complained of the misleading
nature of an increasing number of pamphlets from African herbalists flooding
over its northern border from Natal. At about the same time, four European
70G.Callaway,SketchesofKafirLife(Oxford,1905),p.93.
71UG19-1936,ProprietaryMedicines,paragraph12,p.11.
72Phillips,Bantu,p.130.
73Hunter,Reactions,pp.305-6;UG22-1932,ReportofNativeEconomicCommission,1930–2,para-
graph947.
74B.G.M.Sundkler,BantuProphetsinSouthAfrica(London,1948),p.222.
75J.T.Brown,AmongtheBantuNomads(London,1926),pp.138–9.
76CampbellLibrary,Durban,KCM55084(b),file3,G.V.Essery,‘ZuluMedicine’(1956/7),p.5.
77QuotedinB.TyrrellandP.Jurgens,AfricanHeritage(Johannesburg,1983),pp.94–101.
78UG 49-1929, Report of Department of Public Health, 1928–9, p. 59; UG 43-1935, Report of
DepartmentofPublicHealth,1935,p.12.
Downloaded
from
https://academic.oup.com/shm/article/18/3/439/1691499
by
Universite
Aix-Marseille
2
user
on
27
October
2023

## Page 13

Self-Medication and Trade in Medicine in South Africa 451
chemists in Durban targeted Africans in the Transkei and Natal with advertise-
mentsfor‘remedies’forimpotence,withtheresultthatasmanyas90,000pamph-
lets in African languages were seized from their premises.79 Some later inroads
intothemailorderbusinessweremadewhennewspapersadoptedacodeofprac-
tice prohibiting certain advertisements, including those promising to procure
women’s miscarriages, treat tuberculosis, or cure sexually-transmitted diseases.80
In 1952, a Proclamation by the Governor General prohibited advertisements of
‘native’medicinesallegedtoprocurewealth,success,immunityfrom‘witchcraft’,
as well as those advertising medicines that were obtained from animal or human
parts.81Thefollowingyear100bagsofmail—containing informationonAfrican
medicines and addressed to people in all parts of the Union—were seized at
Durban Post Office.82 But official attempts to stem the flow had only a minor
impact, not least because genuine and bogus medicines continued to have
strong consumer appeal.
Thatthemedicinetradecouldpullincustomerswasshownbythewealthofan
African medicine trader known as ‘Dr’ Alexander. Alexander had come from
Lesotho to Durban, had become an inyanga or indigenous healer in 1928, and
two years later had opened a ‘House of Medicine’ called ‘I Kaya le Muti’. This
Durban ‘House of Medicine’sold both African medicines and patent medicines,
butwasgivenupinthemid-1930sinorder tobeginaherbalmailorderbusiness
called ‘Green Leaf Products’.83 Herb selling was one of few trading openings for
Africans, and Alexander was among the most successful black businessmen in
employing 40 people in his mail order business.84 His activities incurred legal
penalties,includingaprosecutionunder the1952Proclamation,whenthousands
ofmailorderpamphletsinEnglishandAfricanlanguageswereimpounded.These
hadpromotedlungtonics,eyedrops,healingointment,vermifuges,aswellashair
straighteners for women, and iron mixtures for men.85 A sample from his 5000
medicines was exhibited in court when it was shown that prominent in their
ingredients were treacle (to sweeten and make medicine palatable) and castor
oil (to make a medicine attractively ‘strong’through its laxative effects).
The Trade in Herbs and other Indigenous Remedies
Herbs were employed by different ethnic and racial groups. Anne Hutchins has
documentedthewideusageofaplant‘forsimilarailmentsindifferentcultures’.86
WehaveseenthatAfrikanerfarmersweredependentonherbalremedies,butthis
79UG19-1936,ProprietaryMedicines,paragraph12,p.10.
80LetterfromSecretarytoNewspaperPressUnionofSouthAfrica,SouthAfricanMedicalJournal,8
June1946.
81GovernmentGazette,October1952;Star,24November1952.
82RandDailyMail,1November1953.
83National Archives, Pretoria, GES 1788, 25/30M; Kwa Muhle Museum Durban, traditional
medicineroom.
84Post,13January1963,7June1959;L.Kuper,AnAfricanBourgeoisie(NewHaven,1965),p.267.
85Kuper,Bourgeoisie,pp.290,292;SundayTimes,9August1953.
86A.Hutchinsetal.,ZuluMedicinalPlants.AnInventory(Pietermaritzburg,1996),p.3.
Downloaded
from
https://academic.oup.com/shm/article/18/3/439/1691499
by
Universite
Aix-Marseille
2
user
on
27
October
2023

## Page 14

452 Anne Digby
was also the case in the smaller number of rural English households.87 The
coloured midwife or oude tante—who frequently looked after the birth of white
babies—invariably carried herbal remedies to deal not only with obstetric
needs, but common ailments as well.88 And herbal medicines were central to
Africanindigenousmedicinewhetherusedbyprofessionalherbalistsor inhouse-
hold remedies.
This means that a herb trade had long existed, although it was seldom docu-
mented. David Gordon has argued that, during the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries, Cannaland in the Little Karoo was the location of a precious natural
resource, canna, a plant that produced the trance-inducing qualities needed for
Khoikhoi (San) healers to extract sickness or make rain. Narcotic plants were
much prized in South Africa so that the Tswana obtained canna from the
Khoikhoi, while the Xhosa on the east coast later exchanged coral and copper
rings for cannabis.89 And by the later eighteenth century the Khoikhoi around
Swellendam were known to have harvested aloe socotorina to make gum aloes
from its leaves, which they sold in Cape Town, with some then exported.90
During the mid-nineteenth century, Dr W. G. Atherstone recorded medicinal
herbal trading—again centred in the Karoo—when Basters (people of mixed
white and Khoikhoi descent) traded sceletium. This was a painkiller used by
Afrikaners to treat an adult’s insomnia or a child’s diarrhoea, while coloured
peoplecheweditasamildnarcoticorintoxicant.91Andherbtradinghadacquired
sufficient importance by 1884 for the South African Medical Journal to refer to the
herbdealerastheregistereddoctor’scompetitor.92Atthebeginningofthetwen-
tieth century, African hawkers from certain tribes in and around Zululand were
recorded as being itinerant herb traders, selling the indungula plant (employed
for fevers in winter, and to ward off lightning strikes in summer), and the
ikatazo plant (whose root was used for colds).93 By this time, itinerant Indian
traders were becoming well established in the herbal medicine trade, while herb
stallscouldalsobefoundbyroadsidesintheeasternCape.94Africantradersfrom
rural areas (predominantly women) continue to sell herbal medicines to urban
consumers in open markets to the present day.95
87D.H.VarleyandH.M.Matthews(eds),TheCapeJournalsofArchdeaconN.J.Merriman(Cape
Town,1957),p.176.
88C.Searle,TheHistoryoftheDevelopmentofNursinginSouthAfrica,1652–1960(Pretoria,1965),
p.99.
89Gordon,‘RitualsofRapture’,pp.67–8,72–3.
90F.Masson,‘AnAccountofThreeJourneysfromCapeTownintotheSouthernPartsofAfrica’,
PhilosophicalTransactionsoftheRoyalSociety,66(1775),287.
91N.Mathie,DrW.G.Atherstone,1814–1898,3vols,vol.II(Grahamstown, n.d),pp.474–5;
information in Kirstenbosch Botanical Garden Conservator; C. W. L. Pappe, Florae Capensis
MedicaeProdomus(CapeTown,1857),p.17.
92SouthAfricanMedicalJournal,I(October1884),126.
93C.deB.WebbandJ.B.Wright(eds),TheJamesStuartArchive,4vols,vol.II(Pietermaritzburg,
1979and1982),pp.84,281.
94C.vanOnselen,TheSeedisMine(Oxford,1997),pp.93,113,186;Essery,‘ZuluMedicine’,p.5;
CampbellLibrary,LauraLongmoreCollection,KCM98/8/21/24.
95V.Williams,‘Here,eatthisroot’,Arena,(17October1998),1–2.
Downloaded
from
https://academic.oup.com/shm/article/18/3/439/1691499
by
Universite
Aix-Marseille
2
user
on
27
October
2023

## Page 15

Self-Medication and Trade in Medicine in South Africa 453
Early advertisements indicate that chemists stocked herbal remedies as did the
firmofG.E.CookinKingWilliam’sTownwithitssupplyof‘nativemedicines’.
CookadvertisedthemeritsofOrsmond’s‘GreatAfricanRemedy’preparedfrom
‘Cape Roots’, as a specific for fevers, a remedy for blood disorders, as unrivalled
for female diseases,aswell as helpful fora range of otherailments from dyspepsia
to syphilis.96 Cook saw this nostrum as appealing to both white and black custo-
mers, so he prepared a descriptive pamphlet in English, Dutch, German, and
‘Kafir’(i.e.Xhosa).AndthefirmofLennonwasalsoquicktoexploitthemarket-
ingpotentialofAfricanherbs,asintheirsalesofmonsoniaasacurefordysentery.97
This formal trading of indigenous remedies—both natural and manufactured—
continued. For example, during the 1950s, a white Transkei trader kept stock
carefully selected to appeal to his local clientele, including ‘tikoloshe fat’ (a pink
liquidmedicinemanufacturedinJohannesburg),aswellasanoilcalled‘injayowaw-
dle’ (dog of the sea) to massage into areas afflictedby lumbago. Also in the store’s
medicinecupboardwere‘lumpsofbaboondungtobemixedwithwaterasacure
forastomach-ache,[and]asmallsquareofdriedelephant’shide...pricedathalfa
crown. You take it home and burn it in your hut and the smell, unsurprisingly,
drives away evil spirits’. The trader had been brought up locally and so was
well aware of his consumers’ preferences in self-medication.
IfJimMorokacomesinheretobuyhisblankets,hisbaccyandhismealiemeal,heexpects
me tostock his shark’s teeth and dried lizards aswell. Jim’s kraal is half way between my
store and Mackenzie’s place. If I don’t stock what Jim thinks he needs, Mackenzie gets
anothercustomer.98
In the towns, African chemists or muti shops were an important source of herbal
medicines,soldalongsideover-the-counterpatentandproprietarymedicines.For
example,J.LongweTwala,fromadynastyofherbalistsinthenorthoftheTrans-
vaal, came to practise in Johannesburg, and by 1931 was sufficiently successful to
run two herb stores in Johannesburg as well as travel along the Reef to visit
clients.99 The herb trade targeted both the individual sufferer and the healer
whosuppliedclients.A1950smutishopinPretoriawasdescribedforwhitenews-
paper readers. It supplied ‘most herbs we want’ according to a local (presumably
Sotho) healer. ‘But, as we use nearly 500 different kinds, we have to go further
afield for many of them. We buy most of our 30 or 40 kinds of animal fats
from Bechuanaland, Basutoland, Southern Rhodesia, and Portuguese East
Africa by mail order’. The journalist reported that ‘Witchdoctors use bones of
animals ranging from those of the elephant to the knee bones of duikers in
their medicine bags. Mamba bones are considered an excellent headache cure
in native circles and smelling a piece of grated and burnt elephant skin will
chase away nightmares’.100 A present-day study of three amayeza esiXhosa
96MosselBayAdvertiser,11September1888.
97AdvertisementinDomesticMonthly,January1899.
98J.B.Shepherd,LandoftheTikoloshe(London,1955),pp.9–11.
99T.D.M.Skota,TheAfricanYearlyRegister(Johannesburg,1931),p.278.
100KCM98/8/21/24.
Downloaded
from
https://academic.oup.com/shm/article/18/3/439/1691499
by
Universite
Aix-Marseille
2
user
on
27
October
2023

## Page 16

454 Anne Digby
storesinPeddieandKingWilliam’sTownintheeasternCapefoundthempatron-
izedbyindividualXhosaconsumerswishingtoalleviatephysicalillnessesandalso
to treat culturally-related needs, such as to gain good luck, or success in love.
However, local herbalists and diviners also bought their medicines and herbs to
make up into specialist mixtures to sell on to clients, finding that purchasing
herbs was more cost-effective than collecting their own plants.101
Historically, herbs were harvested from the local bush or from a garden, with
the healer attaching importance to the location of the plant as well as the hour
and season of harvesting, because this was related to the chemistry and potency
ofthemedicinalplantneededforanindividualclient.Butincreasingurbanization
hasmeantthatitineranttraders,storekeepersandlater mailorderbusinesses,che-
mists, and informal traders have become larger-scale suppliers. The therapeutic
implications of this commercialization are unclear, although traditional healers’
associations are concerned to reduce some of the drawbacks of stored herbs, as
in warehouse provision,102 while there has been much discussion, and several
practical developments, in the conservation of indigenous resources through
self-sustaining herbal plots.103
Durban has long beenthe principal market in South Africa for herbs, drawing
insuppliesfromasfarnorthasHluhluweandasfarsouthasPondoland.By1946,
the extent of the Durban herbal medicine trade was such that 40–50 bags of isi-
bihahawere sent by rail daily from Hluhluwe in north Zululand to Durban. This
verypopularherbwasusedforarangeofdisordersincludingcoughs,colds,influ-
enza, rheumatism, and headaches, as well as being considered as an antidote for
sorcery. A continued growth in the commercial herb trade is shown by an
increased number of Zululand and Natal suppliers from two in 1929 to more
than a hundred registered traders by the end of the twentieth century. An econ-
omic survey in 1998 estimated that 14,000 people were involved in Durban’s
herbal supply chain, and that the trade was worth as much as 170 million
Rands (over 15 million pounds).104 Indeed two-fifths of the 1000 herbs used in
Zulu medicine are available commercially.105
Evidence islacking on thehistorical dynamics andfull extent of the market in
African medicines, although it seems likely that when communication was more
difficult,herbaltraffichadamorerestrictedgeographicalrange,exceptfor rareor
much sought-after items. Today the main axis of traffic in African medicines is
betweenDurban(themarketforZululandherbs)andJohannesburg(theregional
southernAfricancentrefor indigenousmedicinalproducts).Otherherbaltrading
pathways also exist but are less visible. Sometimes these are linked to migrant
routes, as is the case today between the Transkei and Cape Town,106 and in
101CocksandDold,‘AfricanChemists’,pp.1505–15.
102Essery,‘ZuluMedicine’,p.5;VanWycketal.,MedicinalPlants,p.14.
103Forexample,theconservationworkoftheSouthAfricanNationalBiodiversityInstituteand
NationalBotanicalGardens(www.nbi.ac.za).
104BusinessReport,17October2001.
105KwaMuhleMuseumtraditionalmedicineroom.
106‘PowerofAfricanHerbsPuttotheTest’,CapeArgus,5August1998.
Downloaded
from
https://academic.oup.com/shm/article/18/3/439/1691499
by
Universite
Aix-Marseille
2
user
on
27
October
2023

## Page 17

Self-Medication and Trade in Medicine in South Africa 455
other cases to the provision of plants that grow only in a few areas, as when
present-dayhealersfromtheFreeStatecometotheCapetofindboophanedisticha,
a plant whose bulb provides a very useful dressing for wounds.107 However, it is
the exotic rather than the more mundane herbs that gain visibility. A colourful
newspaper description of 1951 highlighted the wares sold in tiny shops in the
Mai Mai indigenous medical market in Johannesburg:
Theexteriors[are]drapedwitheverythingfromdryingskins,feathers,gapingsharksjaws,
lion teeth, monkey paws, to rotting anatomical interiors. Window boxes bristle with
strange herbs, odd succulents and miscellaneous weeds. ... The makeshift counters are
strewn with twisted roots, strips of bark, horns, ostrich eggs, animal hair, porcupine
quills, snake fangs, eagle heads, bird wings, baboon skulls ... finding space for it all is
ever a problem, so the ‘doctor’ devised a scheme of dangling his most potent wares
fromtheroof andwalls—crocodile feet, turtle shells, lizard,python, armadillo,crocodile
and leguaaan (sic)skins.108
Reflections
This article has focused on the supply and demand for medicines used in
self-medication and suggested the importance of regional diversity within an
emerging national market. Itinerant traders and general stores in country areas
conducted a sizeable business in patent medicines, while the facility of the
urban chemist was extended into rural areas by mail order. Businesses were
created to sell herbal and patent medicines, at first on a small scale by itinerant
drug vendors, later on a larger one, by wholesale, retail, and postal businesses.
In addition, a national market in herbs developed with the main axis going
fromDurbantoJohannesburg.Notonlywerethesevariedmedicinesincreasingly
accessible but their prices were attractive, so that the cost of self-medication was
cheaper than the fee of a ‘western’ or traditional doctor. The commercialization
of medicine increased the range of medicaments available, producing a growing
hybridity in self-medication as sufferers developed medical pluralism. Thus,
although certain medical staples were perceived as part of cultural identity,
there was considerable fluidity in sufferers’ choices as, for example in the use by
the Afrikaner of Khoikhoi remedies or the Africans’ consumption of ‘western’
patent and proprietary medicines.
The medical consumer was likely to be less well informed about the selection
onofferthanwiththepurchaseofothergoods,andtheeffectsofchoiceswereless
defined. Indeed, the process of self-medication could involve a paradoxical
dynamic since, although it might empower sufferers through control of initial
decision-making, the judgements made, if ill-conceived, might themselves
make individuals less able to control their longer-term destinybecause of dimin-
ished physical capacity. The efficacy of medications may have ranged from the
helpful (particularly with proprietary medicines) to the harmless (with many
patent medicines falling into this category). But there were medicines with
107PersonalcommunicationfromTaniaAndersonoftheMcGregorMuseum,Kimberley.
108Outspan,19October1951.
Downloaded
from
https://academic.oup.com/shm/article/18/3/439/1691499
by
Universite
Aix-Marseille
2
user
on
27
October
2023

## Page 18

456 Anne Digby
harmful sideeffects (asoccurredwith someopiate oralcohol-basedpatentmedi-
cines). Some herbal medicines had toxic side effects.109 On the other side of the
balancesheet,thepositiveplaceboeffectofeveninertmixturesneedstobetaken
intoaccount,sinceamedicinethatmadeasuffererfeelpsychologicallybettermay
well have aided a natural process of physical recovery. Culturally specific belief
systems—suchasAfrikanerconfidenceinDutchremediesorAfricantrustinindi-
genous medicine—would tend to reinforce any placebo effect.
Patent and proprietary remedies were also directed beyond real sickness.
Advertisements effectively manufactured syndromes that branded wares, then
promised to alleviate—such as impure blood, biliousness, or nervous exhaus-
tion. Promotions were typically of a ‘before and after’ character, with promises
that the listless and afflicted would be transformed into the vital, vigorous, and
virile. In addition, suppliers targeted more general qualities to persuade custo-
mers that desirable attributes could be improved or undesirable ones eliminated.
Advertisements might play on the reader’s anxieties or low self-worth by refer-
ring to cultural ideals of ‘beauty’that could be attained only by using the mer-
chandise. Products to straighten hair, or lighten skin, fell into this category.110
Much might be dismissed as harmful or fraudulent since objectively the ‘reme-
dies’ might not deliver what they promised. Subjectively, however, the balance
sheet may be harder to interpret; if a quality such as vitality was sufficiently
indefinite, consumers might well convince themselves that they had purchased
what the product assured them would be theirs, and perhaps then assume that
attribute.
Also relevant is consideration of the counterfactual: how people would have
fared without these patent, proprietary, and herbal medicines. In some instances,
suchascasesofTBbeforethe1950s,orvariouscancers,thealternativeofclinical
‘western’medicinewaslikelytohavebeennomoreeffectivetherapeuticallythan
self-medication. In other cases, self-medication would have harmed the sufferer
since it postponed recourse to more efficacious treatments, as in delaying a visit
to the clinic for treatment of sexually-transmitted diseases. But whether this
option was theoretical or real in terms of actual historical resources needs to be
factored into any cost–benefit analysis. The maldistribution of health
resources—withextremeunder-developmentofruralareas,andmoreparticularly
asevereneglectofremoteregionswithadenseconcentrationofAfricans—meant
thatAfricanswere‘literallycompelledtofallbackonproprietarymedicineswhen
they fall ill’, as even an official committee conceded.111 Accessibility and afford-
abilitycontinueto beimportant,aswasshowninthe SouthAfricanDepartment
109See,forexample,astudyof57plantsusedbyXhosa,Zulu,andSothohealersinconnection
with childbirth, which found that 16, or more than a quarter, were toxic. See D. J. H. Veale,
‘South African Traditional Herbel Medicines Used During Childbirth’, Journal of Ethnopharmacy,
36(1992),185–91.
110In1989skinlighteninglotionsweremadeillegalonthegroundsthattheycouldcausedisfig-
urementorcancer.
111UG19-1936,ReportonProprietaryMedicines.
Downloaded
from
https://academic.oup.com/shm/article/18/3/439/1691499
by
Universite
Aix-Marseille
2
user
on
27
October
2023

## Page 19

Self-Medication and Trade in Medicine in South Africa 457
of Health’s recent restrictive regulation of dispensing by doctors, and its
controversial pricing regulations for medicines in pharmacies.
Acknowledgements
Grateful acknowledgement is made to the Wellcome Trust for funding this
research; to Tania Anderson, William Beinart, Harriet Deacon, Philip Isaacs,
Mervyn Susser, and Helen Sweet for assistance with documentation; and to
Charles Feinstein, Shula Marks, and two anonymous referees for helpful
comments.
Downloaded
from
https://academic.oup.com/shm/article/18/3/439/1691499
by
Universite
Aix-Marseille
2
user
on
27
October
2023

