## Page 1

frontiers I Frontiers in Pharmacology REVIEW
published:29June2022
doi:10.3389/fphar.2022.895286
Antidepressant Effects of South
African Plants: An Appraisal of
Ethnobotanical Surveys,
Ethnopharmacological and
Phytochemical Studies
MeliaBokaeng Bonokwane1, Makhotso Lekhooa2*,Madeleen Struwig1and
Adeyemi OladapoAremu3*
1UnitforEnvironmentalSciencesandManagement,FacultyofNaturalandAgriculturalSciences,North-WestUniversity,
Mmabatho,SouthAfrica,2PreclinicalDrugDevelopmentPlatform,FacultyofHealthSciences,North-WestUniversity,
Potchefstroom,SouthAfrica,3IndigenousKnowledgeSystemsCentre,FacultyofNaturalandAgriculturalSciences,North-West
University,Mmabatho,SouthAfrica
OPEN ACCESS
Globally,thesearchforsafeandpotentnatural-basedtreatmentfordepressionisreceiving
Editedby: renewedinterestgiventhenumerousside-effectsassociatedwithmanyexistingdrugs.In
ShengWei,
South Africa, the use of plants to manage depression and related symptoms is fairly
ShandongUniversityofTraditional
ChineseMedicine,China documented among different ethnic groups. In the current study, we reviewed existing
Reviewedby: ethnobotanical, ethnopharmacological and phytochemical studies on South African
Jui-HuShih, medicinal plants used to manage depression. Electronic databases were accessed for
Tri-ServiceGeneralHospital,Taiwan
scientific literature that meets the inclusion criteria. Plants with ethnobotanical evidence
GermainSotoingTaiwe,
UniversityofBuea,Cameroon weresubjectedtoafurtherpharmacologicalreviewtoestablishtheextent(ifany)oftheir
*Correspondence: effectivenessasantidepressants.Criticalassessmentresultedin20eligibleethnobotanical
MakhotsoLekhooa
records, which generated an inventory of 186 plants from 63 plant families. Due to the
Makhotso.Lekhooa@nwu.ac.za
AdeyemiOladapoAremu cultural differences observed in the definition of depression, or lack of definition in some
Oladapo.Aremu@nwu.ac.za cultures, most plants are reported to treat a wide range of atypical symptoms related to
depression.Boophonedisticha,LeonotisleonurusandMenthalongifoliawereidentifiedas
Specialtysection:
Thisarticlewassubmittedto the three most popular plants, with over eight mentions each from the ethnobotanical
Ethnopharmacology, records.ThedominantfamilieswereAsteraceae(24),Fabaceae(16),Amaryllidaceae(10),
asectionofthejournal
and Apocynaceae (10) which accounted for about 32% of the 186 plants. Only 27
FrontiersinPharmacology
Received:13March2022 (≈14.5%) of the plants have been screened for antidepressant activity using in vitro
Accepted:16May2022 and in vivo models. Agapanthus campanulatus, Boophone disticha, Hypericum
Published:29June2022
perforatum, Mondia whitei and Xysmalobium undulatum, represent the most studied
Citation:
plants.Phytochemicalinvestigationonnineoutofthe27plantsrevealed24compounds
BonokwaneMB,LekhooaM,
StruwigMandAremuAO(2022) withantidepressant-likeeffects.Someoftheseincludedbuphanidrineandbuphanamine
AntidepressantEffectsofSouth which were isolated from the leaves of Boophone disticha, Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol,
AfricanPlants:AnAppraisalof
cannabidiol and cannabichromene obtained from the buds of Cannabis sativa and
EthnobotanicalSurveys,
Ethnopharmacologicaland carnosic acid, rosmarinic acid and salvigenin from Rosmarinus officinalis, A significant
PhytochemicalStudies. portion (≈85%) of 186 plants with ethnobotanical records still require pharmacological
Front.Pharmacol.13:895286.
doi:10.3389/fphar.2022.895286 studiestoassesstheirpotentialantidepressant-likeeffects.Thisreviewremainsavaluable
FrontiersinPharmacology|www.frontiersin.org 1 June2022|Volume13|Article895286

## Page 2

Bonokwaneetal. SouthAfricanAntidepressantPlants
referencematerialthatmayguidefutureethnobotanicalsurveystoensuretheirrobustness
and validity as well as database to identify promising plants to screen for pharmacology
efficacy.
Keywords:alkaloids,Asteraceae,herbalmedicine,ethnobotany,psychoactiveplants,mental-health,indigenous
knowlegde
INTRODUCTION increased prevalence of depression suggests that fluctuations in
hormones during puberty, menstruation, after pregnancy and
Clinical depression represents one of the most prevalent and around menopause may trigger depression in women (Albert,
highly comorbid psychiatric conditions that causes a negative 2015).Inmostdevelopingcountries,thereisalimitedaccessto
emotionalexperienceassociatedwithpathophysiologicalchanges treatmentformentaldisorders,especiallyinprimaryhealthcare
(Saki et al., 2014). In this review, we will differentiate between settings(Staffordetal.,2008;Ferrarietal.,2013).Asaresult,the
clinical depression (MDD) and the ailments/symptomology communities have often used plants to alleviate some of the
described as depression amongst communities (MDD-com). symptomology associated with depression or feeling unwell.
MDD is a mental health disorder characterized by a persistent Following the development of the WHO Traditional Medicine
depressed mood and loss of interest in activities once enjoyed, Strategy 2014–2023 and due to the legal acknowledgement of
causing noticeably significant changes in the patient’s life traditionalhealers,theSouthAfricangovernment,asamember
(Mungai and Bayat, 2019). MDD brings about physiological, stateoftheWHO,developedlegislationandpoliciestofacilitate
behavioral and psychological symptoms initiated through the institutionalization of traditional medicine in South Africa
stressful life situations that are difficult to overcome (Martins (Mothibe and Sibanda, 2019).
andBrijesh,2018;Fathinezhadetal.,2019).SymptomsofMDD MDD-comincludesmentalhealthrelatedproblemsthatcould
mayincludeadepressedmood,pervasivelackofenergy,achange beclassifiedasdepressionbasedonsimilarclinicalsymptomsand
in sleeping patterns and psychomotor activity, changes in isperceivedbyAfricantraditionalhealersascausedbyancestorsor
appetite and/or weight, cognitive disturbances that make it bewitchment (Sorsdahl et al., 2009). When interviewed on the
difficult to think, concentrate, or make decisions, feeling understanding of depression, one participant (traditional healer)
worthless, guilt, and repeated thoughts of death and suicidal fromaSouthAfricanstudyconductedbyStarkowitz,(2013)stated
attempts or idealizations (American Psychiatric Association, that “traditionally,there isnot somethinglikedepression,” while
2000; World Health Organisation, 2017). MDD is caused by anotherparticipantreplied“wedon’thavetheworddepression.”
imbalanceswithcertainneurotransmittersinthecentralnervous Thosewithsomedegreeofunderstandingoftheconceptdefined
system(Muniretal.,2020).AccordingtoSchildkraut,(1965),the MDD-comas“anexperienceof“feelingsick”inwardandfeeling
most studied basis of the pathophysiology of MDD is the downinyourheartwhiletheoutsidefleshwillbefeelingfine,”and
alteration of monoaminergic activity in the brain, which leads “an experience that makes a person feel like lying down and
to the depletion of serotonin, dopamine and norepinephrine covering themselves with a blanket” (Starkowitz, 2013). Several
neurotransmitters. The noradrenaline and serotonin systems states, such as “being put down” by ancestors, experiencing
play an important role in stress response, the regulation of headaches and migraines, being possessed by evil spirits,
emotions and the neurobiology of depression (Ressler and mourning, sorrow and being inflicted with curses often
Nemeroff, 2000). Antidepressants are the current MDD resemble a depressed and hopeless state (Stafford et al., 2008).
treatment focusing on improving monoamine activity, Multiple somatic complaints such as headaches and fatigue
however, they are associated with adverse side effects and a represent the most common presentations of MDD-com in
delayed response time (Saki et al., 2014; Popa-Velea et al., Zimbabwe (Todd et al., 1999). Wei et al. (2016) reported that
2015), leading to poor clinical outcomes. the prevalence rate of depression in patients with headache was
MDDisoneofthethreeleadingcausesofdiseaseburdenin 19.7%,andthatabout15.2%ofthepatientshadheadachedueto
SouthAfricaandglobally(Nglazietal.,2016).TheWHOranked somatic symptoms of depression (cause of headache) and 10.9%
it as the largest contributor to global disability, with over an attributedtheirprimaryheadacheasacomorbidityofdepression.
estimated 300 million people suffering from MDD globally in Moreover,depressionincreasedtheriskoftension-typeheadache
2015(WorldHealthOrganisation,2017).Itisprojectedthatby instudyparticipantsfollowinglaboratorystress(Jankeetal.,2004).
2030,MDDwillbeconsideredtheglobaldiseaseburdenbasedon Thisoverlapbetweendepressionandheadacheprovidesevidence
serious limitation on existing treatment methods owed to the ofalinkbetweenmedicinalplantsusedtraditionallyforheadache
therapeutic success, safety and efficacy of available and potential antidepressant properties. Particularly, appropriate
antidepressants (Abbas et al., 2015). According to the South utilization of disease categories and classification allow for
African Stress and Health (SASH) study, MDD is among the cross-culture comparisons (Staub et al., 2015). Therefore, the
mental disorders with the highest lifetime prevalence in South emic perception and categorization of diseases (which usually
Africa(Hermanetal.,2009).MDDismoreprevalentinfemales comes from within a culture) has to be understood for the
than in males (World Health Organisation, 2017). The development of a culturally appropriate classification system
correlation between hormonal changes in women and an (Heinrich et al., 2009).
FrontiersinPharmacology|www.frontiersin.org 2 June2022|Volume13|Article895286

## Page 3

Bonokwaneetal. SouthAfricanAntidepressantPlants
TheuseoftraditionalmedicineiswidespreadinSouthAfrica, reporting systematic reviews and meta-analysis (Moher
where an estimated 70–84% of the black population consult et al., 2009; Moher et al., 2015). Electronic databases such
traditional healers at some point (Koen et al., 2003; Robertson, as the Web of Science, MEDLINE (PubMed), ScienceDirect
2006;Staffordetal.,2008).Inaddition,morepeopleoftenutilize and Google Scholar were searched for published and
traditional healers than medical practitioners for their primary unpublished scientific literature, including journal articles,
health care (Robertson, 2006). This can be attributed to books, theses and dissertations, on South African medicinal
preferences, the increased demand for herbal products in plants used to treat clinical depression and related ailments.
preventative health care and general well-being, and the easy Thesedatabasesweresearchedusingkeywords/phrasessuchas
availability of the cheaper, individualized and culturally South African medicinal plants, antidepressant effects of
appropriate traditional healthcare system (Mander, 1998; medicinal plants, ethnobotany of South Africa, indigenous
Viljoen et al., 2019). The use of commercially processed herbal plant use, medicinal plant use, South African psychoactive
preparationsaspartoftraditionalmedicine,andthesalethereof, plants, Zulu medicinal plants. In addition, literature was
hasincreasedoverthelastdecade(Ndhlalaetal.,2011).Theuse retrieved from the library of the North-West University
ofherbalmedicinesuchaspsychotropicplantextractsiscommon (NWU), South Africa. All medicinal plants identified by this
amongst patients with mood-like and anxiety-like disorders, search were subject to a further literature review to establish
including MDD (Sarris et al., 2011). Boophone disticha is one theextent(ifany)ofpharmacologicalresearchconductedinto
ofthemostpopularmedicinalplantsinSouthAfricawherebulb the efficacy of the plants as antidepressants. The electronic
infusions of this plant are used to treat headache and mental databases mentioned above were used to search for
condition (Hutchings et al., 1996; Sobiecki, 2002). Sceletium pharmacological studies providing supporting evidence of
tortuosum was used in the prehistoric times as a mood- the antidepressant-like effects for each plant species, both
altering substance, and the plant is chewed or drank in vitro and in vivo. To filter these studies, search terms
traditionally for depression and stress (Hutchings et al., 1996; “antidepressant effect of plants” and other keywords relating
Van Wyk et al., 1997; Van Wyk and Gericke, 2000; Sobiecki, todepressionandspecificmonoaminesinvolved,togetherwith
2002). Infusions made from leaf, fruit and leaf decoctions of plant species names, were used.
Schinusmolleareusedasantidepressants(BhatandJacobs,1995).
Severalmedicinalherbsarebeingusedtotreatmentaldisorders Eligibility Criteria
including depression (Fathinezhad et al., 2019). Hypericum Thescreeningofallsearchresultsinvolvedreviewingthetitleand
perforatum L. is being used to treat mild depression as an abstract of articles and identifying and selecting eligible
alternative to conventional synthetic antidepressants (Nielsen publications, downloading identified research articles, and
et al., 2004), while Sceletium tortuosum (L.) N.E. Br has been critically assessing the articles on how they met the inclusion
developed into various pharmaceutical products for mood criteria.
elevation (Stafford et al., 2008).
Despite theanecdotal and long-termuse of medicinal plants Inclusion Criteria
forthetreatmentofMDDandrelatedailmentsinSouthAfrica, For a research article to be included in the review it must:
an in-depth and up-to-date appraisal on this subject is lacking.
Moreover,theneedtobridgethecross-culturalgapobservedin (cid:129) Be a published ethnobotanical survey reporting potential
the definition of depression by exploring the regional, cultural antidepressant effects of medicinal plants
and/ortraditionalconceptsofdepressionasunderstoodbySouth (cid:129) Indicatethetraditionaluse,safetyandtoxicityofmedicinal
African traditional healers cannot be overemphasized. This plants for depression and related ailments (e.g. headache,
review focuses on the ethnobotanical studies on South African sorrow, mourning, nervousness, stress, tension, mental
plants with potential antidepressant effects, their illness known as “spirits,” alcoholism, insomnia, insanity,
pharmacological (in vitro and in vivo) screening and feeling like crying) in South Africa
phytochemical assessment. This study is envisaged to provide (cid:129) Be published or made available on the internet during the
an in-depth and current state of knowledge in the search for research period (i.e. up to November 30, 2021)
South African plants with antidepressant potential and identify
criticalgapsforfutureresearchdirectionintheon-goingglobal For Ethno-Pharmacological Studies
search for safe and efficient antidepressants.
(cid:129) PlantextractsmustbeinvestigatedagainsteitherSerotonin
reuptaketransporter(SERT),Dopaminetransporter(DAT)
MATERIALS AND METHODS and Noradrenalin transporter (NAT) receptors in vitro.
(cid:129) Evaluatetheeffectofplantextractonbehavioralmarkersof
Literature Search Strategy depression in vivo and the safety/toxicity profile.
Aweb-basedsystematicliteraturesearchwasconductedfrom
March to November 2021 to identify ethnobotanical Exclusion Criteria
information on medicinal plants used traditionally in South Research articles were excluded from the review if they:
Africa to treat MDD and MDD-com. The systematic review
was conducted according to the PRISMA guidelines for (cid:129) Ethnobotanical review articles (literature or systematic)
FrontiersinPharmacology|www.frontiersin.org 3 June2022|Volume13|Article895286

## Page 4

Bonokwaneetal. SouthAfricanAntidepressantPlants
RESULTS
Records identified through Additional records identified
Literature Search Results
database searche> through other sources
(n=l442) (n=6)
Atotalof1,442publicationrecordswereidentifiedfromonline
database searches. Additional data were obtained from six
literature sources (books) retrieved from the NWU library,
making a total of 1,448 records that were screened. After the
Records remo\-ed with
reasons (e.g. Duplicates) removal of duplicates, 44 articles and books were assessed for
(n=l 404) eligibilityandexploredrelativetotheinclusioncriteria.Thefull
text of 44 studies was reviewed in detail and 24 studies were
removed due to limited data and other reasons stated in the
Full text articles assessed for exclusion criteria. Finally, 20 studies were reviewed for the
eligibility
documentation of the potential antidepressant-like effects of
(n=44)
medicinal plants (Figure 1). The literature comprises of a total
Full text articles remo\-ed of 15 area specific ethnobotanical surveys (75%) and five plant
based on limited data
inventories (25%). These studies covered six out of the 9
(n=24)
(approximately 67%) provinces in South Africa, with multiple
studies being conducted in KwaZulu-Natal and Western Cape
Studies included in the
$)"Stemarie re\iew (bothfourstudies).Themostcommonmethodofdatacollection
(n=20) across the eligible articles was semi-structured and structured
interviews(40%oftheliterature).Mostoftheliteraturereviewed
coversawiderangeofmedicinalusesforeachplant.However,for
FIGURE1|Searchstrategyresultsfortheidentificationofstudies thepurposeofthisreview,onlytheplantmedicinalusesrelatedto
includedinthesystematicreview. depressionandassociatedsymptomswerelistedinthegenerated
plant inventory.
The operational definition of MDD was inconsistent across
(cid:129) Focus on natural resources (other than plants) used for most of the ethnobotanical literature reviewed. Most of the
depression literature did not define MDD but a broad range of traditional
(cid:129) EthnobotanicalsurveysthatisnotfocusingonSouthAfrica medicinal uses in their surveys, rather than medicinal uses
(cid:129) Have limited data (e.g. missing scientific plant names) on specific to MDD. Since most medicinal uses reported in the
the medicinal use of plants for depression literature are indigenous knowledge gathered from South
African traditional healers, records of the potential
Data Collection antidepressant effects of medicinal plants are listed as MDD-
Relevant data on the antidepressant-like effects of South com,whichentailsailmentsbasedlargelyonsomaticsymptoms
African medicinal plants were extracted to Excel suchasheadaches,fatigue,orspirits.AccordingtoMosothoetal.
spreadsheets following the pre-defined criteria. (2008), there has been the misconception, until recently, that
Bibliographies from accessed articles, together with their developing countries are relatively free of psychiatric problems,
citations, were downloaded and saved on an online such as MDD, which are encountered in industrialized nations.
reference manager (EndNote). Missing information from Mosotho etal. (2008)also highlightedthatMDDmaybe easily
some articles (e.g. local names, life form of the plant, and misdiagnosed since physical complaints, such as headaches, are
misspelt scientific names) and in cases of research papers notalwaysrecognizedasamanifestationofdepression.Thislack
lacking geographic locations of the study, the data was of inconsistency between western and indigenous disease
retrieved through direct web searching (Google). Scientific classification makes the evaluation of medicinal plant use in a
names of plants, family, local names, life form of plants, western scientific setting more difficult (Staub et al., 2015;
method of preparation of the plant-based medicine, route of Weckerle et al., 2018).
administration and short notes were collected for each plant Theabsenceofmethodologicalframeworkwasevidentinone
from each article. Where possible, data on the ethnic group of the reviewed study (Moteetee et al., 2019). A number of
thatuses the plants traditionallywere collected. Plantspecies concerns were observed with the naming of the listed plants
and family were validated in references to The World Flora which are oftenencountered in published articles (Rivera et al.,
Online (http://theworlflora.online) and PlantZAfrica (http:// 2014).About50%(10)ofthearticleslistedatleastonescientific
pza.sanbi.org/) while the local names were confirmed using name incorrectly either by misspelling the scientific name,
PlantZAfrica(http://pza.sanbi.org/).Anybotanicalsynonyms recording an incorrect or ambiguous scientific name or by
orunacceptednameswereupdatedtotherecentupdatedplant using non-standard author abbreviation (Van Wyk et al.,
nomenclature and are reported as such in this review. The 1997; Van Wyk and Gericke, 2000; Van Wyk et al., 2008;
plants listed in this review are arranged in alphabetical order Mogale et al., 2015; Hulley and Van Wyk, 2019). In
based on plant families and scientific names. approximately 65% of the reviewed studies, there was no
FrontiersinPharmacology|www.frontiersin.org 4 June2022|Volume13|Article895286

## Page 5

Bonokwaneetal. SouthAfricanAntidepressantPlants
Unspecified 66
Leaves 49
Roots 29
Bark 13
Whole plant - 9
Bulb -4
-
Stem 3
-
Rootstock - 3
Rootbark -3
Branches 3
-
Wood -3
Tuber 2
Rhizomes 2
Seeds ■ 1
Corm ■ 1
0 10 20 30 40 so 60 70
FIGURE2|ThefrequencyofmedicinalplantpartsusedinSouthAfricafordepressionandrelatedailments.
Burning Unspe<ified
21% 25%
Chewing
2%
I
Crushing\
4%
Tea
2%
Compressing
6%
Rubbing
2% Poultice
1%
Powder
14%
FIGURE3|Differentmethodsofpreparationformedicinalplants(n=215).Outofthe186medicinalplantsrecorded,severalhad˃1methodusedforpreparation.
evidence of the identity of the medicinal plant recorded as the South African Medicinal Plants With
authorsfailed toprovidedetailsofthevoucher specimenofthe Potential Antidepressant Effects
plants.Failuretoprovidesufficientdetailsontheidentificationof
Table1representsanoverviewofthekeycharacteristicsofeach
the voucher specimen often makes the validation of the plant
of the ethnobotanical studies reviewed. Included studies were
species difficult (Weckerle et al., 2018). Although some authors
conductedandpublishedduringtheperiodfrom1989to2019.A
specified the plant parts used for the herbal preparation for
total of eightstudieswere conducted in thepast 7years. In this
managing depression and related ailments, this information
review, 186 medicinal plants from 63 plant families have been
was absent in many cases (Figure 2). Likewise, similar
concern was evident with the method used for preparing the listedasbeingusedinSouthAfricatotreatMDDandMDD-com
plants(Figure3).Theseaforementionedconcernsareimportant (SupplementaryTableS1).Thelifeformsfortheplantsincluded
information required for the generation of plant inventory to shrubs (40%), trees (21%), herbs (38%) and grasses (1%). An
ensure the integrity of data from ethnobotanical surveys. overviewof54medicinalplantsthatcomprisedofpopularplants
FrontiersinPharmacology|www.frontiersin.org 5 June2022|Volume13|Article895286

## Page 6

Bonokwaneetal. SouthAfricanAntidepressantPlants
TABLE1|AnoverviewofethnobotanicalliteraturedocumentingSouthAfricanmedicinalplantswithpotentialantidepressanteffects.
Reference Province Area/region Title/focus Ethnic No. No. Voucher Characteristics Methodological
ofthe group ofplant ofplant specimen ofparticipants framework
study species families deposited (data
collection
andanalysis,
techniques)
VanWyk Southern Unspecified Aninventoryof Unspecified 12 9 Unspecified Unspecified Ethnobotanical
and Africa usefulplantsof book
Gericke, SouthernAfrica
(2000)
VanWyk Eastern South-eastern Anethnobotanical Xhosa, 8 5 Unspecified Localexperts Ethnobotanical
etal.(2008) Capeand Karoo,Graaff- surveyofmedicinal Khoikhoi fieldstudies
Western Reinetand plantsusedinthe andSan
Cape Murraysburg southeasternKaroo
regions
Nortjeand Northern Kamiesberg, Anethnobotanical Khoisan 12 11 Yes Localinhabitants Semi-structured
vanWyk, Cape Namaqualand surveyofmedicinal andstructured
(2015) plantsofthe interviews
Kamiesberg,
Namaqualand,
SouthAfrica
Hutchings, KZN Unspecified Asurveyand Zulu,Xhosa 40 22 Unspecified Unspecified Ethnobotanical
(1989) analysisof andSotho fieldstudies
traditionalmedicinal
plantsasusedby
theZulu,Xhosaand
Sotho
Hutchings, KZN Unspecified AninventoryofZulu Zulu 54 31 Unspecified Traditionalhealers Ethnobotanical
etal.(1996) medicinalplants book
VanWyk Unspecified SouthAfrica Inventoryof Unspecified 27 19 Unspecified Unspecified Ethnobotanical
etal.(1997) medicinalplantsof book
SouthAfrica
Sobiecki, Unspecified Unspecified Apreliminary Unspecified 40 26 Unspecified Traditionalhealers Interviews
(2002) inventoryofplants
usedfor
psychoactive
purposesin
southernAfrican
healingtraditions
Corrigan KZN KwaNibela Anethnobotanical Zuluand 2 2 Unspecified Community Ethnobotanical
etal.(2011) Peninsula,StLucia surveyofplants Swati membersand fieldstudies
usedinthe traditional
KwaNibela knowledgeexperts
Peninsula,StLucia,
SouthAfrica
Bhatand Eastern Transkei Anethnobotanical Xhosa 3 3 Yes Elderlyvillagers, Interviews
Jacobs, Cape surveyoftraditional traditionaldoctors
(1995) herbalmedicine andherbalists
usedinTranskei
Stafford, KZNand Unspecifiedpartsof Ethnobotanical Zulu 34 23 Unspecified Unspecified Ethnobotanical
(2009) Western KZNandWestern literaturesurveyof fieldstudies
Cape Cape SouthAfrican
medicinalplants
withcentralnervous
systemrelated
activityanduse
Moffett, Lesotho Unspecified Anethnobotanical Sotho 45 23 Unspecified Traditionalhealers Interviews
(2016) andFree surveyofmedicinal
State plantsusedbythe
Basotho
(Continuedonfollowingpage)
FrontiersinPharmacology|www.frontiersin.org 6 June2022|Volume13|Article895286

## Page 7

Bonokwaneetal. SouthAfricanAntidepressantPlants
TABLE1|(Continued)AnoverviewofethnobotanicalliteraturedocumentingSouthAfricanmedicinalplantswithpotentialantidepressanteffects.
Reference Province Area/region Title/focus Ethnic No. No. Voucher Characteristics Methodological
ofthe group ofplant ofplant specimen ofparticipants framework
study species families deposited (data
collection
andanalysis,
techniques)
Venterand Unspecified Unspecified AlistofusefulSouth Unspecified 11 8 Unspecified Unspecified Ethnobotanical
Venter, Africanindigenous book
(2016) trees
DeBeer Northern Agter–Hantam Anethnobotanical Khoi–San 7 6 Yes Traditionalhealers Interviews
andVan Cape surveyofthe andlocalpeopleof
Wyk,(2011) Agter–Hantam, Khoi–Sandescent
NorthernCape
Province,South
Africa
Hulleyand Western WesternLittle Quantitative Khoi-San 21 16 Yes Children(13–19y/ Ethnobotanical
VanWyk, Cape Karoo/Kannaland medicinal o),adults(20–59y/ fieldsurvey
(2019) (Barrydale,Zoar, ethnobotanyof o)andsenior
Calitzdorpand Kannaland(western citizens(60y/oand
Vanwyksdorp) LittleKaroo),South above)ofKhoi
Africa descent
Mogale Limpopo Central Theethnobotanyof Pedi 3 2 Unspecified Twenty-sevenlocal Ethnobotanical
etal.(2019) Sekhukhuneland Sekhukhuneland inhabitants fieldsurveysand
(Frisgewaghtat andtheplantsused interviews
Phokwane,Ga- byruralBapedi
Moretsele/ people
Tsehlwanengnear
JaneFurseandGa-
Sekhelenear
Schoonoord)
Moteetee Lesotho Unspecified Theethnobotanyof Sotho 17 13 Unspecified Unspecified Unspecified
etal.(2019) andtheFree theBasothoof
State Lesothoandthe
FreeStateProvince
ofSouthAfrica
(SouthSotho)
Philander, Western Unspecified Anethnobotanyof Khoi-San, 18 15 Yes Bushdoctors Ethnobotanical
(2011) Cape WesternCape Rastafari fieldsurvey,
Rastabush interview
medicine
Mongalo, Limpopo Bloubergarea Ethnobotanical Pedi 2 2 Yes Traditionalhealers Ethnobotanical
(2018) knowledgeofthe andmedicinalplant fieldsurvey,
laypeopleof sellers questionnaires
Bloubergarea(Pedi
tribe),Limpopo
Province,South
Africa
Thringand Western Bredasdorp/Elim Medicinalplantuse Coloured 10 5 Yes Elderlypeople Interviews,
Weitz, Cape regionofthe intheBredasdorp/ population questionnaires
(2006) SouthernOverberg Elimregionofthe
SouthernOverberg
intheWestern
CapeProvinceof
SouthAfrica
Mhlongo KZN Amandawe Zulumedicinal Zulu 2 2 Unspecified Community Ethnobotanical
andVan ethnobotany:new members fieldsurvey
Wyk,(2019) recordsfromthe
Amandaweareaof
KwaZulu-Natal,
SouthAfrica
KZN,KwaZulu-Natal.
FrontiersinPharmacology|www.frontiersin.org 7 June2022|Volume13|Article895286

## Page 8

Bonokwaneetal. SouthAfricanAntidepressantPlants
TABLE2|ExamplesofpopularmedicinalplantsusedagainstdepressionandrelatedailmentsinSouthAfricabasedonmultiplementionsinethnobotanicalliteratureandthe
presenceofpharmacologicalevidence.
Plantfamily Scientificname Localname# Life Plantpart Methodof References
[synonyms] form used preparation,route
ofadministration
and/orshort
notes
Aizoaceae Sceletiumtortuosum(L.)N.E.Br Kanna(E);Kougoed(A) Herb Wholeplant Usedasapsychoactive Hutchingsetal.(1996);
[Mesembryanthemum substance;Emeticsmade NortjeandvanWyk,
tortuosumL.] fromleavesinboilingwater (2015);Philander,
areadministeredforthe (2011);Sobiecki,
fearfuldreams;Leavesused (2002);VanWykand
totreatheadache;Whole Gericke,(2000);Van
plantchewedordrunkfor Wyketal.(1997)
depressionandanxiety
disorders;Pastuseasa
mood-alteringsubstance
fromprehistorictimes;The
driedplantmaterialis
preparedtraditionallyand
chewed,smoked,or
powderedandinhaledasa
snuff;Wholeplantusedto
elevatemoodandreduce
anxietyandstress
Amaryllidaceae AgapanthuscampanulatusF.M. Bellagapanthus(E);Bloulelie(A); Herb Unspecified Unspecifiedpartsusedby Moffett,(2016);
Leight.[A.campanulatussubsp. Ubani(Z);Leta-la-phofu(S); theSothototreatpeople Sobiecki,(2002);
patens(F.M.Leight.)F.M. Ugebeleweni(X) with“spirit,”whichisatype Stafford,(2009)
Leight.] ofmentaldisturbance;
Unspecified
Boophonedisticha(L.f.)Herb. Capepoisonbulb,soreeyeflower Herb Bulb Usedasemeticsand Hutchings,(1989);
[AmaryllisdistichaL.f.,Brunsvigia (E);Gifbol,seeroogblom(A); snuffedorinhaled Hutchingsetal.(1996);
disticha(L.f.)Sweet,B.toxicaria Leshoma(S);Incwadi(X); medicines;Bulbdecoctions Moffett,(2016);
(L.f.exAiton)Herb.] Incotho(Z) areadministeredbymouth Philander,(2011);
toadultssufferingfrom Sobiecki,(2002);
headaches;Unspecified; Stafford,(2009);Van
Unspecified;Bulbinfusions WykandGericke,
aredrunktoinduce (2000);VanWyk,etal.
hallucinationsandtotreat (1997)
mentaldiseases;
Unspecified;Bulbsareused
totreatheadache;Weak
decoctionsofbulbscales
administeredbymouthor
asenemasforheadache
HaemathuscoccineusL.[H. Marchflower,paintbrushlily(E); Herb Roots Boiledrootdecoctionsare Hutchingsetal.(1996)
latifoliusSalisb.] Bergajuin,bloedblom(A); takenasemetics
Uzaneke(Z)
Scadoxuspuniceus(L.)Friisand Paintbrushlily(E);Rooikwas(A); Shrub Bulbs Bulbsareusedfor Hutchingsetal.(1996);
Nordal[HaemanthuspuniceusL, Umgola(Z) headaches;Unspecified VanWyk,etal.(1997)
H.rouperiauct.H.superbus
Baker]
Anacardiaceae SchinusmolleL.[S.angustifolia Falsepeppertree(E); Tree Stems, Infusionsmadefromleaves BhatandJacobs,
SesséandMoc.,S.huigan Peperboom(A) leaves andfruitsandleaf (1995);HulleyandVan
Molina,S.mollevar.molle,S. decoctionsareusedas Wyk,(2019);Nortjeand
occidentalisSesséandMoc.] antidepressants; vanWyk,(2015);Van
Unspecifiedpartpressedon Wyketal.(2008)
theheadforheadache;
Leavesusedascompress
totreatheadache;Fresh
leavesplacedonacloth
withvinegarandwrapped
ontheheadforheadache
(Continuedonfollowingpage)
FrontiersinPharmacology|www.frontiersin.org 8 June2022|Volume13|Article895286

## Page 9

Bonokwaneetal. SouthAfricanAntidepressantPlants
TABLE2|(Continued)ExamplesofpopularmedicinalplantsusedagainstdepressionandrelatedailmentsinSouthAfricabasedonmultiplementionsinethnobotanical
literatureandthepresenceofpharmacologicalevidence.
Plantfamily Scientificname Localname# Life Plantpart Methodof References
[synonyms] form used preparation,route
ofadministration
and/orshort
notes
Apiaceae AlepideaamatymbicaEckl.and Giantalepidea(E);Kalmoes(A); Herb Rhizome; Dryrhizomeandrootsare Sobiecki,(2002);Van
Zeyh.[A.amatymbicavar Ikhathazo(Z);Iqwili(X);Lesoko(S) roots smoked,orpowderedand WykandGericke,
amatymbicaEckl.andZeyh.,A. takenasasnufftohelp (2000);VanWyketal.
amatymbicavar.cordataEckl. preventnervousness;Dry (1997)
andZeyh.,A.aquaticaKuntze, rhizomesaresmokedor
Eryngiumamathymbicum(Eckl. powderedandtakenas
andZeyh.)Koso-Pol] snuffformildsedationand
vividdreams;Fresh
rhizomesarechewed,or
decoctionsaremadefrom
driedproduct.Also
administeredassnuffor
burntandinhaled.Smoke
fromrootsusedasamild
sedative
Centellaasiatica(L.)Urb.[C. Indianpennywort(E);Inyongwane Herb Leaves Finelygroundleavesused Sobiecki,(2002);Van
asiaticavar.asiatica,C.asiatica (X);Varkoortjies(A) assnuff;Dried,powdered WykandGericke,
var.cristaMakino,C.hirtella leafusedasasnuff,which (2000);VanWyketal.
Nannf.] producesacalming, (1997)
sedativeeffect;Possesses
anti-inflammatory,
tranquilizingandage-
relatedneuroprotective
effects
Heteromorphatrifoliata Parsleytree(E);Mkatlala(S); Tree Leaves Emeticsandsnuffedor Hutchings,(1989);
(H.L.Wendl.)Eckl.andZeyh. Umbangandlala(Z) inhaledmedicines;Leaf Hutchingsetal.(1996);
[Bupleurumtrifoliatum decoctionsare Sobiecki(2002)
H.L.Wendl.andBartl.] administeredformentaland
nervousdiseasese.g.
smokedforheadaches;The
Sothoadministerleaf
decoctionsformentaland
nervousdiseases,and
Xhosaadministerwarmleaf
infusionsforsimilar
purposes
Apocynaceae Gomphocarpusfruticosus(L.) Milkweed(E);Tontelbos(A); Herb Wholeplant Emeticsandsnuffedor Hutchings,(1989);
W.T.Aiton[AscleciasfruticosaL., Lebejana(S);Umsinga- inhaledmedicines;Dried Moffett,(2016);Mogale
G.fruticosussubsp.decipiens lwesalukazi(Z) aerialpartsusedassnuff; etal.(2019);Nortjeand
(N.E.Br)GoyderandNicholas,G. Leavesaretakenorallyas vanWyk,(2015);
fruticosussubsp.flavidus headachetreatment;Roots Stafford,(2009);Van
(N.E.Br)GoyderandNicholas,G. usedassnufftotreat WykandGericke,
fruticosussubsp.rostratus headache;Snuffmadefrom (2000);VanWyketal.
(N.E.Br)GoyderandNicholas] powderedleavesusedasa (1997)
sedative;Unspecified;Snuff
madefrompowdered
leavesisusedasasedative;
Snufffrompowderedleaves
isusedasasedative
Hoodiagordonii(Masson)Sweet Bushman’shat,Hoodia(E); Shrub Unspecified Unspecified VanWyketal.(1997)
exDecne.[Scytanthusgordonii Bitterghaap(A)
(Masson)Hook.,Stapelia
gordoniiMasson]
Mondiawhitei(Hook.f.)Skeels White’sginger(E);Umondi(Z) Herb Roots Rootinfusionsusedtotreat Sobiecki,(2002);
[ChlorocodonwhiteiHook.f.,C. stressandtensioninadults; Stafford,(2009)
whiteiiHook.f.] Unspecified
Xysmalobiumundulatum(L.) Milkbush(E);Bitterhout/melkbos Herb Roots Emeticsandsnuffedor Hutchings,(1989);
W.T.Aiton[Asclepiasciliata (A);Iyeza(X);Ishinga(Z); inhaledmedicines; Hutchingsetal.(1996);
MurrayexDecne.,A.leucotrica Leshokoa(S) Unspecified;Usedas Moffett,(2016);
(Continuedonfollowingpage)
FrontiersinPharmacology|www.frontiersin.org 9 June2022|Volume13|Article895286

## Page 10

Bonokwaneetal. SouthAfricanAntidepressantPlants
TABLE2|(Continued)ExamplesofpopularmedicinalplantsusedagainstdepressionandrelatedailmentsinSouthAfricabasedonmultiplementionsinethnobotanical
literatureandthepresenceofpharmacologicalevidence.
Plantfamily Scientificname Localname# Life Plantpart Methodof References
[synonyms] form used preparation,route
ofadministration
and/orshort
notes
Schltr.,A.undulataL., decongestantandfor Sobiecki,(2002);
Gomphorcarpusundulatus(L.) headache;Rootscontain Stafford,(2009);Van
Schltr.] severalglycosideswith Wyk,etal.(1997)
weakcentralnervous
systemdepressantand
antidepressantactivity;
Unspecified;Powderedroot
usedassnuff
Asparagaceae BowieavolubilisHarv. Climbingonion(E);Knolklimop(A); Herb Bulb Emeticsandsnuffedor Hutchings,(1989);
[Ophiobostryxvolubilis(Harv.) Ugibisisila,iguleni,(Z); inhaledmedicines;Infusions Hutchingsetal.(1996);
Skeels,Schizobasopsisvolubilis Umgaqana(X) madefromcrushedbulbs Philander,(2011);Van
(Harv.)J.F.Macbr.] areusedasprotective Wyk,etal.(1997)
washeswhentravelling;
Bulbusedtotreatsoreeyes
andheadache;Unspecified
Asteraceae Afroasterhispida(Thunb.) Baker’swildaster(E);Udlutshana Herb Roots Emeticsandsnuffedor Hutchings,(1989);
J.C.ManningandGoldblatt (Z);Umthekisana(X);Phoa(S) inhaledmedicines;Ground Hutchingsetal.(1996);
[AsterbakerianusBurttDavyex rootsaretakenassnufffor Moffett,(2016);Van
C.A.Sm.,A.asper(Less.) headaches;Dried, Wyketal.(1997)
Schönland,A.bakerianussubsp. powderedrootstakenas
albiflorusW.Lippert] snuffordecoctionstaken
orallyforheadache;Dried,
powderedrootstakenas
snuff
ArtemisiaafraJacq.exWilld.[A. Africanwormwood(E);Wilde-als Shrub Leaves Leavesusedinthe HulleyandVan,Wyk
tenuifoliaMoench] (A);Umhlonyane(X);Mhlonyane treatmentofheadacheand (2019);Hutchingsetal.
(Z);Lengana(B) anxiety;Infusionsorsteam (1996);Stafford,(2009);
fromcrushedleavesare ThringandWeitz,
commonlyinhaledfor (2006);VanWyketal.
headachesandcolds; (1997)
Unspecified;Teamadefrom
leavesusedtotreat
headache;Unspecified
ArtemisiadracunculusL.[A. Truetarragon,bitingdragon(E) Herb Unspecified Unspecified Stafford,(2009)
dracunculoidesPursh]
PlucheascabridaDC.[Conyza Ovenbush(E);Bakbos(A); Shrub Leaves Unspecifiedpartsusedto HulleyandVanWyk,
scabrida(DC.)DC.ExMiq] Mokotedi-wa-thaba(S) treatheadache;InTranskei, (2019);Hutchingsetal.
groundleavesaresnuffed (1996);Mogaleetal.
forheadaches;Rootsare (2019);Moteeteeetal.
usedtotreatdepression; (2019);Thringand
Leavesareplacedoncloth Weitz,(2006);vanWyk
withvinegar/brandyand etal.(1997);VanWyk
wrappedaroundheadfor etal.(2008)
headache;Unspecified;
Leavesplacedinclothwith
vinegar/brandyand
wrappedaroundthehead
totreatheadache
TarchonanthuscamphoratusL. Camphorbush(E);Kankerbos(A); Tree Branches; Sotho’susesmokefrom Hutchingsetal.(1996);
[T.camphoratusvar. Igqeba-elimhlophe(Z);Sefahla(S) leaves burninggreenbranchesas Moffett,(2016);Venter
camphoratus,T.abyssinicus aninhalantforheadaches; andVenter,(2016)
Sch.Bip.] Infusionsofleavesandtwigs
usedtotreatheadache;
Branchesareburnt,and
smokeinhaledfortherelief
ofheadache
(Continuedonfollowingpage)
FrontiersinPharmacology|www.frontiersin.org 10 June2022|Volume13|Article895286

## Page 11

Bonokwaneetal. SouthAfricanAntidepressantPlants
TABLE2|(Continued)ExamplesofpopularmedicinalplantsusedagainstdepressionandrelatedailmentsinSouthAfricabasedonmultiplementionsinethnobotanical
literatureandthepresenceofpharmacologicalevidence.
Plantfamily Scientificname Localname# Life Plantpart Methodof References
[synonyms] form used preparation,route
ofadministration
and/orshort
notes
Cannabaceae CannabissativaL Marijuana(E);Dagga(A);Umnya Herb wholeplant Usedinthetreatmentof Hutchingsetal.(1996);
(X);Matekwane(S);Nsangu(Z) depressivemental Mongaloetal.(2018);
conditions;Wholeplantis VanWykandGericke,
usedtotreat“Vaalsick”and (2000);VanWyketal.
excessiveheadache; (1997)
Smokedtoinducewell-
being,relaxation,sociability
and/orspirituality;
Administeredorally,
intravenouslyorbytopical
applicationfortreatmentof
depressionandother
conditions
Capparaceae CapparistomentosaLam.[C. Woollycaperbush(E); Shrub Roots Emeticsandsnuffedor Hutchings,(1989);
alexandraeChiov.,C.biloba Wollerige(A);Imfihlo(X); inhaledmedicines;Roots Hutchingsetal.(1996);
Hutch.andDalziel,C.floribunda Umabusane(Z) areburnttoformapowder Sobiecki,(2002);Van
Wight] thatisrubbedinto Wyketal.(1997)
scarificationsforthereliefof
headache;TheZuluuse
unspecifiedpartstotreat
madness;Powdered,burnt
rootsrubbedintoskinfor
headache
MaeruaangolensisDC.[M. Bead-beantree,bead-podtree Tree Leaves Steamfromleavesinhaled VenterandVenter,
angolensissubsp.angolensis] (E);Knoppiesboontjieboom(A); totreatheadache (2016)
Umenwayo(Z);Mogogwane(S);
Mutamba-na-mme(V)
Euphorbiaceae SynadeniumcupulareL.C. Dead-man’stree(E);Gifboom(A); Tree Leaves Emeticsandsnuffedor Hutchings,(1989);
Wheeler Umbulele(Z) inhaledmedicines;Leaves Hutchingsetal.(1996);
arebrokenupandinhaled VanWykandGericke,
torelieveheadaches; (2000)
Leavesareusedas
medicineforheadache
Fabaceae Albiziaadianthifolia(Schum.) Flat-crownalbizia(E);Platkroon Tree Bark Takenassnuff;Powdered Corriganetal.(2011);
W.Wight[A.adianthifoliavar. (A);Umgadankawu(Z); barkistakenasasnufffor Hutchingsetal.(1996);
adianthifoliaSchum.)W.Wight, Umhlandlothi(X) headaches;Powderedbark VanWyketal.(1997);
MimosaadianthifoliaSchum.] usedassnuff;Barkis VenterandVenter,
powderedandusedas (2016)
snuffforthereliefof
headache
Tephrosiacapensis(Jacq.)Pers CapeTephrosia(E); Shrub Roots Emeticsandsnuffedor Hutchings,(1989);
Pelodimaroba(S) inhaledmedicines;Dried Hutchingsetal.(1996);
powderedrootsareusedas Moffett,(2016);
snufftorelieveheadaches; Sobiecki,(2002)
Driedrootssnuffedfor
headache;Driedpowdered
rootsareusedasasnufffor
headachesandplant
decoctionsfornervousness
(Continuedonfollowingpage)
FrontiersinPharmacology|www.frontiersin.org 11 June2022|Volume13|Article895286

## Page 12

Bonokwaneetal. SouthAfricanAntidepressantPlants
TABLE2|(Continued)ExamplesofpopularmedicinalplantsusedagainstdepressionandrelatedailmentsinSouthAfricabasedonmultiplementionsinethnobotanical
literatureandthepresenceofpharmacologicalevidence.
Plantfamily Scientificname Localname# Life Plantpart Methodof References
[synonyms] form used preparation,route
ofadministration
and/orshort
notes
Hypericaceae HypericumperforatumL.[H. SaintJohn’swort(E); Shrub Wholeplant PopularintheWestandin Sobiecki,(2002);Van
vulgareLam.,H.perforatumvar. Johanneskruid(A) SouthAfricafortreatingmild Wyketal.(1997)
petiolatumPeterm depression,anxietyand
sleepdisorders;Powdered
extractsusedas
antidepressants
HypericumrevolutumVahl[H. Currybush,forestprimrose(E); Shrub Unspecified Unspecified Stafford,(2009)
kalmianumVahl,H.revolutum Kerriebos(A)
subsp.revolutum]
Hypoxidaceae HypoxishemerocallideaFisch., Starflower,yellowstar(E); Shrub Corm Emeticsandsnuffedor Hutchings,(1989);
C.A.Mey.andAvé-Lall.[H.elata Sterblom(A);Inkomfe(Z); inhaledmedicines;Corm Hutchingsetal.(1996);
Hook.f.,H.obconicaNel,H. Lotsane(S) infusionsaregivenas Moffett,(2016);
patulaNel,H.rooperiT.Moore, emeticsformental Moteeteeetal.(2019);
H.rooperivar.forbesiiBaker disorders;Usedascharmto Sobiecki,(2002);Van
cureheadacheandfor Wyketal.(1997)
anxietyanddepression;
Medicinalplantusedfor
headache;Corminfusions
areusedforinsanity;
Infusionsofcormsand
leavesusedasemetics
Lamiaceae BallotahirsutaBenth.[B.africana Capehorehound(E); Shrub Leaves Leafinfusionsusedfor HulleyandVanWyk
Colmeiro,B.cinerea(Desr.)Briq.] Katterkruie(A) treatingheadache; (2019);Nortjeandvan
Compressesonheadto Wyk(2015);Philander
treatheadache;Treats (2011);Thringand
headaches;Usedtotreat Weitz(2006);VanWyk
headaches;Infusionsused etal.(1997);VanWyk
totreatheadache;Drankto etal.(2008)
treatheadache
Leonotisleonurus(L.)R.Br. Lion’sear,wilddagga(E); Shrub Wholeplant Emeticsandsnuffedor Hutchings,(1989);
[LeonurusafricanusMill., Wildedagga(A);Imvovo(X); inhaledmedicines;Cold Hutchingsetal.(1996);
LeonurusgrandiflorusMoench, Umcwili(Z) waterinfusionsfromleaves Philander,(2011);
LeonurussuperbusMedik., areinhaledtorelieve Sobiecki,(2002);
PhlomisleonurusL.,P.speciosa feverishheadaches; Stafford,(2009);Thring
Salisb.] Unspecified;Leavesare andWeitz,(2006);Van
smokedforepilepsyand WykandGericke,
partialparalysis; (2000);VanWyketal.
Unspecifiedpartsusedfor (1997)
headache;Decoctionsof
flowers,stemsandleaves
areusedtotreatheadache;
Decoctionstakenfor
headache
Menthalongifolia(L.)L.[M. Wildmint(E);Kruisement(A); Herb Leaves Leafinfusiondrankastea DeBeerandVanWyk,
longifolia(L.)Huds.] Bohatsu(S);Umfuthana andwarmcompressof (2011);HulleyandVan
lomhlhanga(Z) leavesusedforheadache; Wyk,(2019);Hutchings,
Unspecifiedpart (1989);Hutchingsetal.
compressedontheheadfor (1996);Philander,
headache;Emeticsand (2011);Thringand
snuffedorinhaled Weitz,(2006);VanWyk
medicines;Sotho’s etal.(1997);VanWyk
sometimesplugtheirnose etal.(2008)
withcrushedleavesand
bindwithaclothfortherelief
ofheadaches;Used
medicinallytotreat
headache;Unspecified
partsusedtotreat
headache;Crushedleaf
(Continuedonfollowingpage)
FrontiersinPharmacology|www.frontiersin.org 12 June2022|Volume13|Article895286

## Page 13

Bonokwaneetal. SouthAfricanAntidepressantPlants
TABLE2|(Continued)ExamplesofpopularmedicinalplantsusedagainstdepressionandrelatedailmentsinSouthAfricabasedonmultiplementionsinethnobotanical
literatureandthepresenceofpharmacologicalevidence.
Plantfamily Scientificname Localname# Life Plantpart Methodof References
[synonyms] form used preparation,route
ofadministration
and/orshort
notes
infusionsordecoctions
drankforheadache;Leaf
infusionmixedwith
kruisementinteafor
headacheandgeneral
malaise
MenthaspicataL.[Mentha Spearmint,gardenmint(E) Herb Leaves Leafinfusiontakenasteato VanWyketal.(2008)
crispataSchrad.exWilld.] treatheadacheandcolds
RosmarinusofficinalisL.[R. Rosemary(E) Shrub Unspecified Usedmedicinallytotreat Philander,(2011)
communisNoronha,R. headache
communisvar.communis]
Lauraceae Cinnamomumcamphora(L.) Camphorlaurel,camphortree(E) Tree Unspecified Detailsnotdisclosed Stafford,(2009)
J.Presl[Camphora(L.)H.Karst.,
LauruscamphoraL.]
Ocoteabullata(Burch.)E.Meyer Blackstinkwood(E);Stinkhout(A); Tree Bark Emeticsandsnuffedor Hutchings,(1989);
inDrege[LaurusbullataBurch., Unukani(X,Z) inhaledmedicines;Bark Hutchingsetal.(1996);
Oreodaphnebullata(Burch.) usedassnuff,inhaledto Sobiecki,(2002);Van
Nees] treatheadache;South Wyketal.(1997)
Africansuseunspecified
partsasanemeticfor
emotionalandnervous
disorders;Finelyground
barkusedassnufffor
headache
Meliaceae EkebergiacapensisSparrm.[E. Capeash(E);Essenhout(A); Tree Leavesand Vha-Vendauseleavesand Hutchingsetal.(1996);
mildbraediiHarms,E.ruppeliana Mmidibidi(S);Umnyamatsi(SS) roots barkinemeticsandfor Sobiecki,(2002);Van
(Fresen.)A.Rich.,E. headache;Leavesare Wyketal.(1997);
senegalensisFuss] poundedincoldwaterand VenterandVente,
thesolutionisextractedand (2016)
inhaledtotreatmental
problems;Rootsusedto
treatheadache;Root
decoctiontakenorallyto
relieveheadache
MeliaazedarachL Chinaberry,persianlilac(E) Tree Leaves Infusionsmadefroma Hutchingsetal.(1996)
handfulofleavesinhalfa
cupofwateraretakenfor
abdominalpains
Myricaceae Morellaserrata(Lam.)Killick MountainWaxberry(E);Berg- Shrub Rootbark Emeticsandsnuffedor Hutchings,(1989);
[MyricaserrataLam.] wasbessie(A);Ulethu(Z); inhaledmedicines; Hutchingsetal.(1996);
Umaluleka(X);Maleleka(S) Rootbarkdecoctionsare Moffett,(2016)
takenforheadaches;
Rootbarkusedfor
headache
Oleaceae Oleaeuropaeasubsp.cuspidata Olivetree,wildolive(E);Olienhout Tree Leaves Unspecified;Infusionsofdry Hutchingsetal.(1996);
(Wall.andG.Don)Cif.[O. (A);Umnquma(Z,X);Motlhware leavesusedtotreat Moffett,(2016);
europaeasubsp.africana(Mill.) (B);Mutlhwari(V) headache;Medicinalplant Moteeteeetal.(2019);
P.S.GreenKewBull.,O. usedforheadache; Stafford,(2009)
chrysophyllaLam.,O. Unspecified
kilimandscharicaKnobl.]
(Continuedonfollowingpage)
FrontiersinPharmacology|www.frontiersin.org 13 June2022|Volume13|Article895286

## Page 14

Bonokwaneetal. SouthAfricanAntidepressantPlants
TABLE2|(Continued)ExamplesofpopularmedicinalplantsusedagainstdepressionandrelatedailmentsinSouthAfricabasedonmultiplementionsinethnobotanical
literatureandthepresenceofpharmacologicalevidence.
Plantfamily Scientificname Localname# Life Plantpart Methodof References
[synonyms] form used preparation,route
ofadministration
and/orshort
notes
Passifloraceae Adeniagummifera(Harv.)Harms Snake-climber,monkeyrope(E); Shrub Roots Rootisusedtomaketonic, Corriganetal.(2011);
[ModeccagummiferaHarv.,A. Slangklimop(A);Impinda(Z) takenorallyasstimulantfor Philander,(2011);
rhodesicaSuess.,A.gummifera seedinessordepression; Sobiecki,(2002)
var.gummifera] Infusionsmadefromrootsin
boilingwaterare
administeredasemetic
tonicsorstimulantsfor
seedinessordepression;
Unspecifiedpartsusedto
treatdepression
Peraceae ClutiapulchellaL.[C.cotinifolia Commonlightningbush(E); Shrub Unspecified Usedasemeticsand Hutchings,(1989);
Salisb.,C.pulchellavar.genuina Gewonebliksembos(A); snuffedorinhaled Moffett,(2016);
Müll.Arg.,C.pulchellavar. Podimolwetse(S);Umsimpane medicines;Usedtotreat Moteeteeetal.(2019)
pulchella,C.gapiniiPax] (X);Umembesa(Z) headaches;Medicinalplant
usedforheadache
Phyllanthaceae Pseudophyllanthusovalis Falselightningbush(E) Shrub Roots Usedasemeticsand Hutchings,(1989);
(E.Mey.exSond.)Vorontsand snuffedorinhaled Hutchingsetal.(1996);
PetraHoffm.[Andrachneovalis medicines;Burntrootsare Philander,(2011)
(E.Mey.exSond.)Müll.Arg., sniffedforheadache;Root
Saviaovalis(E.Mey.exSond.) emeticstakentorelieve
PaxandK.Hoffm.] morningstressandbody
achesandburnedroots
snuffedforheadache
Poaceae Cymbopogonnardus(L.)Rendle Tamboekiegras(A);Isicunge/ Grass Shoot,roots Usedtorevitalisethenerves Sobiecki,(2002)
[C.virgatusStapfexBor,C. isiqunga(Z) ofmoodypeople,Zuluuse
validus(Stapf)StapfexBurtt therootsandshootsto
Davy,Sorghumnardus(L.) strengthenthenervous
Kuntze] system
Polygalaceae Securidacalongipedunculata Violettree,fibretree(E); Tree Roots; Rootkernelisusedtotreat Mongaloetal.(2018);
Fresen.[Elsota Rooipeultjie(A);Mmaba(S); wood headache;Powderedroot/ VanWyketal.(1997)
longipendunculata(Fresen.) Iphuphuma(Z);Mpesu(V) woodrubbedonforehead
Kuntze,S.longipendunculata forheadache
var.longipendunculata]
Polygonaceae RumexsagittatusThunb.[R. Climbingdock(E);Ranksuring(A); Herb Rootstock Emeticsandsnuffedor Hutchings,(1989);
scandensBurch.,Acetosa Umdende(Z);Tshitamba-tshedzi inhaledmedicines; Hutchingsetal.(1996);
sagittataJohnsonandBriggs] (V);Bodilaboboholo(S) Powderedrootstockused Moffett,(2016);
bytheSothoasasnufffor Moteeteeetal.(2019)
headaches;Powdered
rootstockusedassnufffor
headache;Usedmedicinally
totreatheadache
Pteridaceae Adiantumcapillus-venerisL.[A. Southernmaidenhairfern(E) Herb Leaves Usedasemeticsand Hutchings,(1989);
capillus-venerisvar.capillus- snuffedorinhaled Hutchingsetal.(1996)
venerisL.,A.capillus-venerisf. medicines;Driedleavesare
dissectum(M.Martensand smokedforheadandchest
Galeotti)Ching] colds
Ranunculaceae RanunculusmultifidusForssk.[R. Commonbuttercup(E); Herb Unspecified Emeticsandsnuffedor Hutchings,(1989);
striatusHochst.exA.Rich.,R. Botterblom,kankerblare(A); inhaledmedicines;Burning Hutchingsetal.(1996);
udusFreyn.] Isijojokazana(Z);Hlapi(S) plantinhaledbytheSotho Moffett,(2016)
peopletorelieveheadache;
Smokeisinhaledtorelieve
headache
(Continuedonfollowingpage)
FrontiersinPharmacology|www.frontiersin.org 14 June2022|Volume13|Article895286

## Page 15

Bonokwaneetal. SouthAfricanAntidepressantPlants
TABLE2|(Continued)ExamplesofpopularmedicinalplantsusedagainstdepressionandrelatedailmentsinSouthAfricabasedonmultiplementionsinethnobotanical
literatureandthepresenceofpharmacologicalevidence.
Plantfamily Scientificname Localname# Life Plantpart Methodof References
[synonyms] form used preparation,route
ofadministration
and/orshort
notes
Rhamnaceae ZiziphusmucronataWilld.[Z. Buffalothorn(E);Blinkblaar-wag- Tree Leaves; Unspecified;Powderedleaf VanWyketal.(1997);
madecassusH.Pierrier,Z. ŉ-bietjie(A);Umphafa(Z); bark andbarkinwateristakenas VenterandVenter,
mucronatasubsp.mucronata] Mongalo(S) anemetic (2016)
Rutaceae Ptaeroxylonobliquum(Thunb.) Sneezewoodtree(E);Nieshout Tree Barkand Emeticsandsnuffedor Hutchings,(1989);
Radlk.[P.utileEckl.andZeyh., (A);Umthathi(X) wood inhaledmedicines;Xhosas Hutchingsetal.(1996);
RhusobliquaThunb.] usepowderedbark Philander,(2011);
traditionallyasasnuffand Sobiecki,(2002);Van
medicallytorelieve Wyketal.(1997);
headaches;Used VenterandVenter,
medicinallytotreat (2016)
headache;Powderedbark
usedassnuff;Powdered
woodusedassnuff;Bark
andwoodusedtomake
snufftotreatheadache
Salicaceae SalixmucronataThunb.[S. CapeWillow(E);KaapseWilger Tree Leaves, Leavesarecompressedon HulleyandVan,Wyk
subserrataWilld.] (A);Mogokare(S);Umnyezane(Z); roots theheadtotreatheadache; (2019);Nortjeandvan,
Munengeledzi(V) Leafcompressusedfor Wyk(2015);Philander,
headache;Usedmedicinally (2011);VanWyketal.
totreatheadache; (1997);Venterand
Decoctionsorinfusions Venter,(2016)
usedforheadache;Root
decoctionusedtotreat
headache
Solanaceae DaturaferoxL.[D.laevisBertol. Long-spinedthornapple(E); Shrub Unspecified Unspecified Stafford,(2009)
D.quercifoliaKunth] Grootstinkblaar(A)
DaturametelL.[D.metelvar. Angel’strumpet(E) Shrub Unspecified Emeticsandsnuffedor Hutchings,(1989);
dentataSchltdl.andCham.,D. inhaledmedicines; Hutchingsetal.(1996);
metelvar.fastuosa(L.)Saff.] Unspecifiedpartssmoked Sobiecki,(2002)
forthereliefofheadache;
Unspecified
DaturastramoniumL.[D. Commonthornapple(E);Malpitte Shrub Leaves Unspecifiedpart HulleyandVanWyk,
stramoniumvar.canescens (A);Ijoyi,umhlabavutha(X);Iloyi(Z) compressedontheheadto (2019);Hutchings,
Roxb.,D.stramoniumvar. relieveheadache;Emetics (1989);Sobiecki,
chalybaeaW.D.J.Koch] andsnuffedorinhaled (2002);Stafford,(2009);
medicines;Unspecified ThringandWeitz,
partssmokedforthereliefof (2006);VanWykand
headache;TheVendause Gerickev(2000);Van
theleavestotreatinsanity. Wyketal.(1997)
Healersinhalepowdered
rootsandleavesassnufffor
divinatorypurposes;
Unspecified;Driedand
powderedleavesusedas
consciousness-altering
snuffbydiviners;Leaves
usedtotreatheadache
NicotianaglaucaGraham[N. Treetobacco(E) Shrub Leaves Compressedonthehead HulleyandVanWyk
glaucalateritiaLillo] forheadache(externaluse (2019);Nortjeandvan
only);Leafcompressused Wyk(2015);VanWyk
totreatheadache;Leaves andGericke(2000);Van
arewarmedandputonthe Wyketal.(2008)
headtorelieveheadache;
Freshleavesappliedtothe
headasapoulticefor
headache
SpeciesandfamilynamesforeachplantspecieswerevalidatedinreferencetoThePlantList(www.theplantlist.org),TheWorldFloraOnline(http://theworlflora.online)andPlantZAfrica
(http://pza.sanbi.org/)andthelocalnameswereconfirmedusingPlantZAfrica(http://pza.sanbi.org/).#Localname:A,Afrikaans;E,English;S,Sotho;SS,SouthernSotho;V,Venda;X,
Xhosa;Z,Zulu.
FrontiersinPharmacology|www.frontiersin.org 15 June2022|Volume13|Article895286

## Page 16

Bonokwaneetal. SouthAfricanAntidepressantPlants
30
25 14
16
;;i
.0..... .1s
0
t
.sD
10 10
i 10
II
I I I I
i i i i
I I I I I I I I
Plant family
FIGURE4|Twenty-twoplantfamilieswiththreeormoreplantspeciesrecordedforthetreatmentofdepression.Intotal,63plantfamiliesrepresenting186plants
wererecordedinSupplementaryTableS1.Theremaining41familieshadonlyoneortwoplants.ThirtyplantfamilieswererecordedinTable2asrepresentinga
narrowed-down54popularmedicinalplants.
basedonmultiplementions(37)fromethnobotanicalstudiesand VanWyketal.,1997).Sceletiumtortuosumhasrecentlyattracted
27plantswithpharmacologicalevidencefordepressionarelisted attentionforitslonghistoryofuseintraditionalmedicineandits
in Table 2. About 20% of the recorded plants (i.e. Adenia possibleuseinpromotingwell-beingandtreatingdepressionand/
gummifera (Harv.) Harms, Albizia adianthifolia (Schum.) orstress(Sobiecki,2002;Harveyetal.,2011).Itwaslikelytohave
W.Wight, Ballota hirsuta Benth., Boophone disticha, been used in the prehistoric times by hunter-gatherers and
Gomphocarpus fruticosus (L.) W.T.Aiton, Mentha longifolia pastoralists as a mood-altering substance (Van Wyk and
(L.) L. and Leonotis leonurus (L.) R.Br.) were categorized as Gericke, 2000). The whole plant is chewed or drank
the most popular based on a relatively high number of traditionally as a psychoactive substance or medicine to elevate
mentions in the ethnobotanical surveys reviewed. The three mood, reduce stress and treat anxiety and depression disorders
most popular plants, with over eight mentions each from (Hutchings et al., 1996; Van Wyk et al., 1997; Sobiecki, 2002).
ethnobotanical surveys, included Boophone disticha, Leonotis Xysmalobiumundulatumhasalonghistoryoftherapeuticusein
leonurus and Mentha longifolia. Several other plants, such as SouthAfricantraditionalmedicine(Helmstädter,2015).Theroots
Agapanthus campanulatus, Cannabis sativa, Heteromorpha ofthisplantcontainglycosideswithweakcentralnervoussystem
trifoliata (H.L.Wendl.) Eckl. and Zeyh., Sceletium tortuosum, depressant and the extracts have demonstrated antidepressant
Schinus molle L. and Xysmalobium undulatum, have been used activity (Hutchings et al., 1996). Powdered roots are used as
traditionally in South Africa to treat MDD and MDD-com snuff or inhaled medicine andas emetics (Hutchings, 1989; Van
(Hutchings et al., 1996; Van Wyk et al., 1997; Van Wyk and Wyketal.,1997).UnspecifiedpartsofAgapanthuscampanulatus
Gericke, 2000). areusedbytheSothototreatpeoplewith“spirit,”whichisatypeof
Boophone disticha is an importantSouthernAfricamedicinal mentaldisturbance(Sobiecki,2002).Infusionsmadefromleaves,
bulb and is popular in South Africa where it is used as herbal fruits,andleafdecoctionsofSchinusmolleareusedtraditionallyas
medicinebytraditionalhealerstoinducehallucinations,andasa antidepressants(BhatandJacobs,1995).Freshleavesareplacedon
medication for mental disorders (Hutchingsetal., 1996; Stafford aclothwithvinegarandwrappedascompressontheheadtotreat
etal.,2008;Neergaardetal.,2009).Bulbinfusionsofthisplantare headache(VanWyketal.,2008;NortjeandvanWyk,2015;Hulley
drankbySouthAfricantraditionalhealersandpatients(Neergaard andVanWyk,2019).Cannabissativaiswidelyusedintraditional
etal.,2009),andweakdecoctionsmadefromthebulbscalesofare African medicine for both recreational and medicinal purposes
takenbymouthorasenemasforheadache(Hutchingsetal.,1996; (Hutchingsetal.,1996;El-Alfyetal.,2010).Thewholeplantisused
FrontiersinPharmacology|www.frontiersin.org 16 June2022|Volume13|Article895286

## Page 17

Bonokwaneetal. SouthAfricanAntidepressantPlants
totreat“Vaalsick” and intenseheadache (Mongaloet al.,2018), Asteraceae (Compositae) as a plant family is known to have
smoked to induce well-being, relaxation, sociability and/or diverse therapeutic applications, and has a long history in
spirituality and administered orally, intravenously or by topical traditional medicine (Rolnik et al., 2021). Members of the
applicationfortreatmentofdepressionandotherrelatedconditions Asteraceae are commonly used to treat various diseases since
(VanWyketal.,1997;VanWykandGericke,2000).Decoctionsfrom ancient times (Panda et al., 2018), including the observation in
theleavesofHeteromorphatrifoliata(H.L.Wendl.)Eckl.andZeyh.are thecurrentreview(Figure4).Asteraceaeareknowntoproducea
administered for mental and nervous diseases and smoked for large quantity of terpenoids, such as hemiterpenes,
sesquiterpenes, diterpenes, monoterpene and polyterpenes, and
headaches (Hutchings et al., 1996). The Sotho and Xhosa
flavonoids, with common flavonols, quercetin and kaempferol
administer leaf decoctions and infusions for the same purpose
and flavones apigenin and luteolin being widely distributed
(Hutchings et al., 1996; Sobiecki, 2002). The continuous reliance
(Hutchings et al., 1996; Sülsen et al., 2017). Trigo et al. (2003)
on traditional medicine has led to an extensive indigenous
isolatedandidentifiedpyrrolizidinealkaloidsofthesenecionine,
knowledge and expertise within local communities, and
platyphylline, rosmarinine, senkirkine subgroups and
documentation thereof, from which herbal product development
triangularine group from the inflorescences of 14 Senecio
canbeinitiated(Fennelletal.,2004;Ndhlalaetal.,2011). (Asteraceae), one of the largest genera of flowering plants
distributed worldwide. Sarker et al. (2001) investigated a
Plant Parts Used, Methods of Preparation methanolic extract from the seeds of Centaurea cyanus L.
(Asteraceae) using preparative RP-HPLC analysis and afforded
and Routes of Administration
four alkaloids of the indole variety: moschamine, cis-
Basedonthereviewedethnobotanicalliterature,differentplantparts
moschamine, centcyamine and cis-centcyamine. Existing
wereusedinthepreparationofmedicinalplantsusedtotreatMDD
pharmacological studies have reported the antidepressant-like
andMDD-com.Plantpartsusedforthepreparationsarespecifiedin
activity of Artemisia dracunculus L. (Asteraceae) in animal
moststudies,withleaves(49times)beingthemostpredominantlyused
models of depression (Jahani et al., 2019; Ilkhanizadeh et al.,
plantpart(Figure2).However,about35%(66)oftheplantsdidnot
2021). Although these studies did not isolate or identify any
specify the plant parts used in the preparation of plant
phytochemicals in their experiments, several phenolic
medicines. Fourteen plant parts (e.g. leaves, bark, roots,
compounds, such as, syringic acid, vanillic acid, chlorogenic
seeds, bulbs and the stem are used for the preparation of
acid, ferulic acid, caffeic acid, quercetin and luteolin are present
herbal medicines in various studies (Figure 2). Recorded
in theplant material of A. dracunculus (Mumivand et al., 2017).
plants were prepared using various preparation methods,
The presence of these alkaloids may be rationale behind the
including decoction, infusion, burning, compressing,
extensive use of plants in this family for the alleviation of
crushing, pounding, tea and powder. The most frequently
depressive symptoms in traditional medicine. Despite this plant
used method of preparation was burning, which accounted
familybeingthemostmentionedinethnobotanysurveys,onlya
for approximately 21% of the plant medicines recorded
fewoftheplantshavebeeninvestigatedpharmacologicallyusing
(Figure 3). This method involves burning plant material and
modelsofdepressiontovalidatethe recorded traditional uses.
inhaling the smoke or smoking the dried plant material. The
Fabaceae often produces indole variety alkaloids, such as
second most frequently used methods of preparation are
N-methyltryptamine, N-methyltryptophan, and choline, able to
infusion and powder, both used 28 times each. Recorded
mimic the structure of the neurotransmitter serotonin, thereby
routes of administration included oral (drinking, chewing),
antagonizing its action with resulting neuroprotective effects
nasal (snuffing, inhaling, steaming) and topical (applied on (Hutchings et al., 1996). Although no specific phytochemicals
the skin, wrapped around the head). The most dominant
were isolated, aqueous extract of Albizia adianthifolia
route of administration is the nasal route which includes
(Fabaceae) leaves increased swimming time and decreased
plants that are powdered and sniffed, and plants that are
immobility time in the forced swimming test conducted using
burnt and their smoke inhaled.
maleWistarrats(Beppeetal.,2015).Theantidepressant-likeeffect
of this plant may be attributed to the potential presence of the
Plant Families Used for Depression and
indolealkaloids(Hutchingsetal.,1996).Thesimilarityinstructure
Related Ailments
ofindolealkaloidstoneurotransmittersincludingserotoninhasled
Atotalof63plantfamiliesarebeingusedinSouthAfricatotreat tothepredictionofthepotentialneurologicalandantidepressant
MDD and MDD-com (Figure 4 and Supplementary Table S1). effectsofseveralmedicinalplantsandtheiractivephytochemicals
Twenty-twooftheplantfamiliesrecordedrepresentedmorethan (Hamidetal.,2017).Furtherinvestigationsarerequiredtoidentify
twoplantspeciesusedtraditionallyagainstMDD.Theremaining these alkaloids from medicinal plants belonging to the Fabaceae
41plantfamiliesrepresentedonlyoneortwoplantspecies.Plant andexploretheirantidepressant-likeeffects.
familieswiththreeormoreplantspeciesrecordedforthetreatment Amaryllidaceae are extensively used traditionally for CNS
of depression and related ailments are presented in Figure 4. activation, with uses such as treatment depression, epilepsy
Several plant families contain relatively higher numbers of plant and other mental disorders (Stafford et al., 2008; Nair and
specieswithpotentialantidepressanteffectsthanothers.Families Van Staden, 2014). Their pharmacological efficacy can be
withthehighestnumbersofplantspeciesincludedAsteraceae(24) attributed to the presence of unique alkaloids previously
andFabaceae (16), Amaryllidaceae (10), andApocynaceae(10). isolated from several medicinal plants belonging to this plant
FrontiersinPharmacology|www.frontiersin.org 17 June2022|Volume13|Article895286

## Page 18

Bonokwaneetal. SouthAfricanAntidepressantPlants
family(Nairetal.,2013;Elgorashi,2019).Amaryllidaceaeisone whitei leaves and tested it for in-vitro for its affinity to SERT.
of the 20 most important alkaloid containing plant families The extracts showed good displacement of [3H]-citalopram in
(Koutová et al., 2020). Plants from the Amaryllidaceae theSERTbindingassay.Inabindingassay,extractsofM.whitei
produce isoquinoline alkaloids classified into unique had exhibited affinity to SERT (Nielsen et al., 2004). Ethanolic
structurally diverse groups, with three major structural-types extracts have further exhibited antidepressant activity in a
galanthamine, lycorine and crinine (Viladomat et al., 1997; functional SERT inhibition assay, and had an antidepressant-
Nair and Van Staden, 2013). The minor series of these like effect in two in vivo models of depression (Pedersen et al.,
alkaloids include tazettine, homolycorine, and montanine 2008). The authors suggested that the in vitro serotonin
(Nair et al., 2013; Nair and Van Staden, 2013). Previous transporter affinity exhibited by the plant extracts was due to
studies of Boophone disticha (Amaryllidaceae), a popular plant the lactone (−)-loliolide.
inSouthAfricantraditionalmedicine,ledtotheidentificationof Two members of the Solanaceae have demonstrated
buphanamine, buphanisine, buphanidrine, distichamine and antidepressant-like effects in in vitro and in vivo investigations
crinine and a confirmation of its antidepressant effects that evaluated the potential antidepressant effects of medicinal
(Nielsen et al., 2004; Sandager et al., 2005; Neergaard et al., plants. An aqueous extract from Datura ferox L. seeds exhibited
2009). Raghoo et al. (2021) identified aromatic, lycorine or high affinity the SERT binding assay (Nielsen et al., 2004), while
crinine type Amaryllidaceae alkaloids from the bulb of extracts from the fresh leaves of Datura stramonium L. exhibited
Ammocharis coranica (Koorbanally et al., 2000a; Elisha et al., antidepressant-like effects in the forced swimming test and open
2013). Bay-Smidt et al. (2011) explored the tribe Haemantheae fieldtestconductedbyDevietal.(2012).Otherfamiliesrepresenting
forpotentialtargetspeciesforthediscoveryofserotoninreuptake medicinalplantspecieswithpharmacologicalevidenceagainstMDD
transport protein inhibitors. From the study, lycorine, are Aizoaceae (Sceletium tortuosum (L.) N.E. Br.), Cannabaceae
homolycorine and montanine type alkaloids were isolated (Cannabis sativa L.), Hypericaceae (Hypericum perforatum L.),
from Haemanthus hirsutus Baker, the extract of H. sanguineus Pteridaceae (Adiantum capillus-veneris), Lauraceae
Jacq. yieldedonlymontaninetypealkaloidsand H.coccineus L. (Cinnamomum camphora), Poaceae (Cymbopogon nardus),
yielded montanine type and crinine type alkaloids, all with Capparaceae (Maerua angolensis), Meliaceae (Melia azedarach),
antidepressant effects. Furthermore, the alkaloid-rich extracts Polygalaceae (Securidaca longipedunculata), Rhamnaceae
Haemanthus coccineus, H. montanus Baker and H. sanguineus (Ziziphusmucronata)andAnarcadiaceae(Schinusmolle)(Figure4).
yielded two isoquinoline montanine type Amaryllidaceae To allow for easy identification and selection of potential
alkaloids, montanine and coccinine, both with antidepressant medicinal plants for pharmacological investigation, the
effects(Staffordetal.,2013).Thisservesasevidencethattheplant relationship between plant families with potential antidepressant
family Amaryllidaceae is of significance and importance in effectsandthevariousphytochemicalspresentinplantsbelonging
phytochemical-based antidepressant drug discovery. tothese familiesremainpertinent. Thiswas achievedby looking
Apocynaceae as a plant family is an important and popular closelyatthephytochemicalprofilesofmedicinalplantsbelonging
sourceofanumberofdrugsincludingsimpleindoles,carbolines, to the four plant families with the highest number of plants
steroidal amines, isomeric quinindolines and quinindoles and recorded in this review. Based on the fact that plants in the
miscellaneoustypealkaloids(RaffaufandFlagler,1960;Deyetal., same family may have similar phytochemical profiles, it is
2017). Members of the Apocynaceae contain alkaloid ibogaine, hypothesized that recognizing plant families of potential (based
whichisusedasapsychedelicdrugforthetreatmentofsubstance onthepresenceofanti-depressivephytochemicals)couldlead to
addiction(KoenigandHilber,2015;Deyetal.,2017),ajmalicine, thediscoveryofpotentialmedicinalplantswithinthosefamiliesfor
an alkaloid used as an antihypertensive drug used to treat high pharmacological investigations using models of MDD. This
blood pressure (Wink and Roberts, 1998), and alstonine, an approach may provide insight on the potential presence of
antipsychotic picralima alkaloid which prevents novel phytochemical compounds of antidepressant value not
hyperlocomotion, memory deficit and social interaction deficit previously isolated from medicinal plants and stimulate
through antipsychosis mediated by 5-HT2A/C receptors (Dey alternative antidepressant drugdiscovery.
etal.,2017).MembersoftheApocynaceaeoftenproduceavast
rangeofindolicalkaloids,includingtryptophan,andharmantype
Phytochemicals With Potential
alkaloidsthatarepsychoactive(TreaseandEvans,1983).Mondia
whitei(Hook.f.)SkeelscommonlyknownasWhite’sginger,isa Antidepressant Effects
popular South African plant used in folk medicine to treat Thereportedethnobotanicalusesofthe186medicinalplantswere
diseases of the nervous system and it has demonstrated based on indigenous knowledge and expertise from traditional
antidepressant properties under in vitro conditions (Pedersen healers and knowledgeable community members. Many of these
etal.,2006;Pedersenetal.,2008;Neergaardetal.,2010;Aremu plants contain phytochemicals with psychoactive and
et al., 2011; Grabarczyk et al., 2015). Koorbanally et al. (2000b) pharmacological effects ranging from sedation, stimulation to
reported the isolation and identification of the previously euphoria and hallucinations (Sobiecki, 2002). Moreover, their
identified chemical compounds 2-hydroxy-4- effects lead to altering of perception, emotion and cognition,
methoxybenzaldehyde andreported the presence of Isovanillin and change in consciousness (Alrashedy and Molina, 2016;
fromamethylenechlorideextractofM.whitei.Neergaardetal. Khan et al., 2018; Martins and Brijesh, 2018). Only 27 (14.5%)
(2010) isolated a monoterpene lactone (−)-loliolide from M. oftherecordedplantshavebeeninvestigatedpharmacologicallyfor
FrontiersinPharmacology|www.frontiersin.org 18 June2022|Volume13|Article895286

## Page 19

Bonokwaneetal. SouthAfricanAntidepressantPlants
depressionwhileonlyninewerephytochemicallycharacterisedto MDD therapy is reported to decreases the risk of some severe
identifyphytochemicalswithantidepressant-likeeffects.Atotalof disorders, including cardiovascular, autoimmune and
24 phytochemicals with antidepressant-like effects have been neurodegenerativediseases(Leeand Bae,2017).
isolated and identified (Table 3). We also identified the plant
partfromwhichthephytochemicalswereisolated,themethodsof Ethnopharmacological Investigations
extractionused,themethodsofisolationandidentificationaswell For the analysis of pharmacological literature, we critically
as the molecular structures of the compound. These plants were assessedtheexperimentalapproachesused,followingmethods
representedby12pharmacologicalstudiespreviouslyconductedto described by Heinrich et al. (2020). Briefly, we looked at the
investigate the in vitro and in vivo antidepressant-like effects. correct identification of plant material under study,
Medicinal plants with the highest number of phytochemicals appropriate methodology, models, and controls. For a
identified are Boophone disticha and Rosmarinus officinalis, each pharmacological study to be included in this review, it had
with five phytochemicals isolated, identified and their to include a validated source of material, standard
antidepressant effects investigated in various models of methodology for herbal antidepressant assays and access to
depression (Sandager et al., 2005; Neergaard et al., 2009; Sasaki fulltextarticleswrittenintheEnglishlanguage.Basedonthe
et al., 2013; Abdelhalim et al., 2015). Phytochemical studies on inclusioncriteriaforthisreview,atotalof27medicinalplants
Rosmarinus officinalis led to the identification of carnosic acid, were investigated pharmacologically for their antidepressant
rosmarinic acid (Sasaki et al., 2013), salvigenin, rosmanol and activity. However, the majority of these plants were screened
cirsimaritin(Abdelhalimetal.,2015),withprovenantidepressant for antidepressant-like effects despite the absence of any
effectsintheFST(Machadoetal.,2009;Abdelhalimetal.,2015), ethnobotanical records indicating their use for such
TST (Machadoetal., 2009; Sasakietal., 2013; Abdelhalim etal., purposes in South African traditional medicine. Plants such
2015; Sasaki et al., 2021) and OFT (Machado et al., 2009). The asAgapanthuscampanulatus,Haemathuscoccineus,Scadoxus
mood elevating properties of extract Sceletium. tortuosum, puniceus, and Mondia whitei have been confirmed to possess
™
Zembrin , are due to the presence of mesembrine, a antidepressant effects, however, they are documented
phytochemical with potent selective serotonin (5-HT) re-uptake ethnobotanically to be administered in the treatment of
activity (Van WykandGericke,2000; Harvey etal., 2011). mental disorders, insanity, headache, nervous disorder, used
Themostfrequentlyusedsolventforextractionofplantmaterial astranquilizers,snuffandsedatives(Table2).Outofthe186
wasethanol,beingusedinsixoutofthe12studies(50%),whilethe medicinal plants recorded in this review (Supplementary
mostpopularmethodofextractionwasmaceration,whichwasused Table S1), only 18 plants (9.7% of the total recorded
infourofthestudies(33.3%).Variousmethodswereusedtoisolate plants) were recorded with indications for managing
andidentifyphytochemicalsfromplantextracts,andtheseinclude depression in ethnobotanical surveys. This has led to a
HPLC–UV separation, bioassay-guided fractionation, vacuum paucity in pharmacological evidence on the antidepressant-
liquid chromatography, gas chromatography, column like effects of South African medicinal plants.
chromatography and preparative thin layer chromatography. Several biological assays have been used to investigate the
Using bioassay-guided fractionation on VLC and preparative antidepressant-like effects of South African medicinal plants,
TLC, Sandager et al. (2005) isolated buphanidrine and including in vitro biological assays (Nielsen et al., 2004;
buphanamine from the leaves of Boophone disticha and tested Sandager et al., 2005; Neergaard et al., 2009; Harvey et al.,
them for their affinity to the SERT protein. These 2011;Staffordetal.,2013)andinvivoassaysconductedusing
phytochemicals inhibited affinity to the SERT in the rat brain. In rodentmodels of depression(Machado et al., 2007; Machado
addition, Neergaard et al. (2009) isolated buphanamine, etal.,2009;El-Alfyetal.,2010;Ahmadpooretal.,2019;Rabiei
buphanisine, crinine, buphanidrine and distichamine by repeated and Setorki, 2019). The mechanism of action of most
preparativeHPLCandtestedtheactivityofthesecompoundsina psychoactive compounds involves endocrine modulation of
SERT binding and a functional SERT inhibition assay. specific molecules in the CNS, modification of multiple
Buphanamine, buphanidrine and distichamine showed high biological effects on reuptake and/or receptor binding of
activity in SERT binding assay, whereas buphanidrine and various monoamines and interacting with neuronal
distichamine showed activity in the functional SERT inhibition receptors (Saki et al., 2014; Alrashedy and Molina, 2016).
assay. El-Alfy et al. (2010) used preparative C HPLC to isolate Medicinal plants and their bioactive compounds producing
18
Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (Δ9-THC), cannabidiol (CBD) and antidepressant therapeutic effects via interaction with
cannabichromene (CBC) from the buds of Cannabis sativa, the serotonergic systems (SERT), noradrenergic (NAT) and
threephytochemicalsthatshowedantidepressant-likeeffectsintwo dopaminergic (DAT) receptors (Machado et al., 2007;
animalmodelsofdepression(theforceswimmingtestandthetail Stafford et al., 2008). Therefore, screening plant extracts for
suspensiontest)conductedinthesamestudy.Otherphytochemicals the effects they have on these neurotransmitters remain
isolated from indigenous plant extracts in similar studies, such as relevant for exploring plants used in traditional medicine
(R)-Citronellal, asiaticoside, adhyperforin, hypericin, loliolide and for treating depression. Furthermore, the forced swimming
carnosic acid, have been investigated in various models of test (FST) and tail suspension test (TST) represent the most
depression, where they showed positive antidepressant-like results widely used and well-established paradigm for screening
(Öztürk et al., 1996; Neergaard et al., 2010; Kalshetty et al., 2012; medicinal plants for antidepressant activity using animals
Victoriaetal.,2014;Sasakietal.,2021).Theuseofphytochemicalsin (Pedersen et al., 2008).
FrontiersinPharmacology|www.frontiersin.org 19 June2022|Volume13|Article895286

## Page 20

Bonokwaneetal. SouthAfricanAntidepressantPlants
TABLE3|Phytochemicalsisolatedandchemicalstructuresofcompoundsfromplantwithantidepressant-likeeffects.
Scientific Reference Plantpart Methodof Methodsfor Compound Molecularstructure
name extraction theisolation
andidentification
Boophone Sandager Leaves Vacuumfiltration Bioassay-guided Buphanamine
disticha etal.(2005) fractionationonVLCand
preparativeTLC
---0
Buphanadrine
----0
Neergaard Bulbs Liquid–liquid HPLC–UVseparation Buphanamine
etal.(2009) partitioning
0
< o
I
Buphanisine
0
0
< o
I
Distichamine
0
0
< o
---0
Cannabissativa El-Alfyetal. Buds Column PreparativeC18HPLC Δ9-
(2010) chromatography tetrahydrocannabinol
(Δ9-THC)
Cannabidiol(CBD)
(Continuedonfollowingpage)
FrontiersinPharmacology|www.frontiersin.org 20 June2022|Volume13|Article895286

## Page 21

Bonokwaneetal. SouthAfricanAntidepressantPlants
TABLE3|(Continued)Phytochemicalsisolatedandchemicalstructuresofcompoundsfromplantwithantidepressant-likeeffects.
Scientific Reference Plantpart Methodof Methodsfor Compound Molecularstructure
name extraction theisolation
andidentification
Cannabichromene
(CBC)
Centellaasiatica Kalshetty Leaves Vacuumfiltration HPLC Asiaticoside
etal.(2012)
Cymbopogon Victoriaetal. Unspecified Reducedpressure GC/MS (R)-Citronellal 0
nardus (2014) distillation
Haemathus Staffordetal. Bulbscales Maceration Columnchromatography Montanine
coccineus (2013) andTLCprofile
Coccinine
H
....... 0
0
Hypericum Tianetal. Unspecified Unspecified Unspecified Adhyperforin
perforatum (2014)
Öztürketal. Aerialparts Maceration HPLCmethods Hypericin
(1996)
0 H
Pseudohypericin
.... -o
Mondiawhitei Neergaard Leaves Liquid–liquid Vacuumliquid Loliolide
etal.(2010) partitioning chromatographyand
PreparativeHPLC
0
(Continuedonfollowingpage)
FrontiersinPharmacology|www.frontiersin.org 21 June2022|Volume13|Article895286

## Page 22

Bonokwaneetal. SouthAfricanAntidepressantPlants
TABLE3|(Continued)Phytochemicalsisolatedandchemicalstructuresofcompoundsfromplantwithantidepressant-likeeffects.
Scientific Reference Plantpart Methodof Methodsfor Compound Molecularstructure
name extraction theisolation
andidentification
Rosmarinus Sasakietal. Leaves Maceration HPLCanalysis Carnosicacid
officinalis (2013)
Rosmarinicacid
2-:ro-,.
" - o ~
H ;r:o
-o ~
o _"
Abdelhalim Wholeplant Infusion Columnchromatography Salvigenin
etal.(2015) andpreparativethinlayer
chromatography / 0
0
I
r
H
Rosmanol
H~ 0
Cirsimaritin
H
0
Sceletium Loriaetal. Leaves Reducedpressure HPLCfingerprinting Mesembrine I
tortuosum (2014) distillation analysis
0
0
(Continuedonfollowingpage)
FrontiersinPharmacology|www.frontiersin.org 22 June2022|Volume13|Article895286

## Page 23

Bonokwaneetal. SouthAfricanAntidepressantPlants
TABLE3|(Continued)Phytochemicalsisolatedandchemicalstructuresofcompoundsfromplantwithantidepressant-likeeffects.
Scientific Reference Plantpart Methodof Methodsfor Compound Molecularstructure
name extraction theisolation
andidentification
Harveyetal. Above- Maceration Filtrationandcolumn Mesembrenone
(2011) groundparts chromatography
Mesembrenol 0 I
-------
0
TLC,Thinlayerchromatography;VLC,Vacuumliquidchromatography;HPLC,High-performanceliquidchromatography;GC/MS,Gaschromatography-massspectrometry.Molecular
structuresforcompoundswereexportedfromPubChemhttps://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/.
In Vitro Biological Assays (SERT, DAT and NAT andScadoxuspuniceusshowedaffinityfortheSERTproteininvitro.
Screening Assays) Most of these active leaf and bulb extracts were extracted using
Invitroassaysutilizedfortheinvestigationofpotentialantidepressant ethanolasasolvent.Generally,ethanolextractswereobservedtohave
effectsofmedicinalplantsincludetheSERT(serotonintransporter) themostsignificantantidepressantactivity.Pharmacologicalstudies
proteinbindingassay,thefunctionalSERTuptakeinhibitionassay, onBoophonedisticharevealedthatethanolicextractsfromthisplant
thefunctionalDAT(dopaminetransporter)uptakeinhibitionassay possess affinity to the SERT protein, and functional inhibition of
andthefunctionalNAT(noradrenalintransporter)uptakeinhibition SERT, DAT and NAT (Nielsen et al., 2004; Sandager et al., 2005;
assay.TheSERTbindingassayincludes,briefly,mixingadilutionof Pedersen et al., 2008; Neergaard etal., 2009). Powdered extracts of
the extract with [3H] citalopram and rat brain tissue suspension, Hypericumperforatumareusedtraditionallyasantidepressantsand
replacingtheextractwithparoxetineforpositivecontrolandwitha represent an accepted alternative to conventional synthetic
bufferfornegativecontrol.Allsamplesarethenincubatedfor2hand antidepressants (Van Wyk et al., 1997; Nielsen et al., 2004). In
filtered under vacuum before radioactivity is measured by liquid vitro pharmacological investigations on H. perforatum reported
scintillation (Nielsen et al., 2004). For the functional inhibition of that this plant possesses affinity to SERT, and it inhibited SERT,
SERT, DAT and NAT, human SERT, NAT and DAT clones NATandDAT(Fiebichetal.,2011;Tianetal.,2014).Theobserved
transfected in COS-7 cells are incubated for 30min in PBSCM antidepressantpharmacologicalactivitiesofH.perforatumappearto
containing 50nM [3H]-5-HT (SERT assay) or 50nM [3H]- be attributed to adhyperforin, hypericin and pseudohypericin,
dopamine (NAT and DAT assays) and increasing concentrations previously isolated from dry extracts, with antidepressant activities
of extracts. The amount of accumulated [3H]-5-HT or [3H]- as effective as conventional antidepressants desipramine and
dopamineisdeterminedbysolubilizingcellsinscintillant,followed trimipramine (Öztürk et al., 1996; Tian et al., 2014). An ethanol
by direct counting of plates. Specific uptake is calculated by extract from Sceletium tortuosum, with alkaloids mesembrine,
subtractinguptakevaluesfromcontrolvalues(Pedersenetal.,2008). mesembrenone and mesembrenol, has shown to inhibit serotonin
Nine plants including Agapanthus campanulatus, Boophone uptake(Harveyetal.,2011).
disticha, Datura ferox L., Hypericum perforatum and Mondia
whitei were investigated for their antidepressant activity using In Vivo Biological Models
in vitro models of depression (Table 4). Most of the in vitro Invivobehavioralmodelssuchastheforcedswimmingtest(FST),tail
investigations on the potential antidepressant effects of medicinal suspensiontest(TST)andtheopen-fieldtest(OFT)wereappliedon
plants was conducted using the SERT binding assay. The invivomodelstheinvestigationofpotentialantidepressanteffectsof
pharmacological screening of medicinal plants for antidepressant medicinalplants.Theforcedswimmingtestisthemostwidelyused
effects has yielded several plants with noteworthy antidepressant testforscreeningofantidepressantsanditinvolvesplacingratsormice
activity. Ethanol extracts from the leaves of Agapanthus individuallyinplasticcylinderscontainingacolumnofwaterwithno
campanulatus, Boophone disticha and Mondia whitei exhibited possibleescapefor6min(Rabadiaetal.,2013).Afterallowingtherats
antidepressant activity in vitro (Table 4). Methanol and ethanol toacclimatizefor2min,immobilitytime(insec)isrecordedinthelast
extractsfromthebulbs ofBoophone disticha,Haemathuscoccineus 4minofthetest(Ahmadpooretal.,2019).Inthetailsuspensiontest,
FrontiersinPharmacology|www.frontiersin.org 23 June2022|Volume13|Article895286

## Page 24

Bonokwaneetal. SouthAfricanAntidepressantPlants
TABLE4|Differentinvitroassaysutilizedforinvestigatingtheantidepressantpotentialofmedicinalplants.
Plant Reference Plant Solvent Model Serotonin SERT Dopamine Noradrenalin
species part used transporter inhibition transporter transporter
(SERT) assay (DAT) (NAT)
binding inhibition inhibition
assay assay assay
Agapanthus Pedersen Unspecified Ethanol Wholeratbrain; Extractsinhibitedthe Theextractinhibited Extractinhibited Extractexhibited
campanulatus etal.(2008) HumanSERT bindingof[3H]- SERTsignificantly DATsignificantly potentinhibitionof
clones;Human citalopramwithIC withIC = withIC = NAT,withIC =
50 50 50 50
DATclones valueof4.9±1.3mg 99.4μg/ml 76.2μg/ml 84.9μg/ml
dryextract/ml
Nielsen Leaves; Ethanoland Ratbrainsfrom Aqueousextractsof — — —
etal.(2004)i flowers water maleWistarrats leavesandflowers
fromA.
campanulatushad
morethan60%
transportprotein
bound[3H]
citalopramatthe
threehighest
concentrations
Boophone Pedersen Unspecified Ethanol Wholeratbrain; Extractsinhibitedthe Theextractinhibited Extractinhibited Extracthadpotent
disticha etal.(2008) HumanSERT bindingof[3H]- SERTwithIC50= DAT,withIC50= inhibitionofNAT,
clones;Human citalopramwithIC50 423.8μg/ml 93.5μg/ml withIC50=
DATclones =0.5±1.5mg/ml 77.3μg/ml
Sandager Leaves Ethanol Ratbrain Buphanamineand — — —
etal.(2005) buphanadrine
showedaffinitytothe
SERT
Nielsen Leaves; Ethanoland Ratbrainsfrom Extractsdisplaced — — —
etal.(2004) bulbs water maleWistarrats morethan50%ofthe
transportprotein
bound[3H]
citalopramatthe
threehighest
concentrations
Neergaard Bulbs Ethanol Ratbrain;human Buphanamine, Buphanidrineand — —
etal.(2009) COS-7cells buphanidrineand distichamine
distichaminewere showedactivityin
themostactive(IC50 thefunctionalassay
=55±4μM(Ki=
23μM),63±9μM(Ki
=26μM)and65±
7μM(Ki=27μM),
respectively)
Daturaferox Nielsen Seeds Ethanoland Ratbrainsfrom Extracthad80% — — —
etal.(2004) water maleWistarrats transportprotein
bound[3H]
citalopramatthe
threehighest
concentrations
Haemathus Stafford Bulbs Methanol Ratbrainsfrom Extractshad — — —
coccineus etal.(2013) maleWistarrats considerableaffinity
fortheSERT,with
IC =2μg/ml
50
Hypericum Tianetal. Unspecified Unspecified Cellmembranes; Adhyperforinhad Adhyperforin Adhyperforin Adhyperforin
perforatum (2014) Rat strongbindingaffinity potentlyblocked potentlyblocked potentlyblocked
synaptosome tothehSERTwithKi theuptakeof5-HT, theuptakeofDA, theuptakeofNE,
value=18.75± withIC =4.14± withIC = withIC =2.64±
50 50 50
7.76mg/ml 0.29mg/ml 0.89± 0.35mg/ml
0.07mg/ml
(Continuedonfollowingpage)
FrontiersinPharmacology|www.frontiersin.org 24 June2022|Volume13|Article895286

## Page 25

Bonokwaneetal. SouthAfricanAntidepressantPlants
TABLE4|(Continued)Differentinvitroassaysutilizedforinvestigatingtheantidepressantpotentialofmedicinalplants.
Plant Reference Plant Solvent Model Serotonin SERT Dopamine Noradrenalin
species part used transporter inhibition transporter transporter
(SERT) assay (DAT) (NAT)
binding inhibition inhibition
assay assay assay
Fiebichetal. Aerialparts Ethanol Ratcerebral Hypericumextracts — — —
(2011) cortex (500μg/ml)inhibited
serotoninuptakeby
greaterthan80%
Mondiawhitei Pedersen Unspecified Ethanol Wholeratbrain; Extractsinhibitedthe Theextractinhibited Nosignificant Nosignificant
etal.(2008) HumanSERT bindingof[3H]- SERTwithIC = effectonthis effectonthis
50
clones;Human citalopramwithIC 283μg/ml transporter transporter
50
DATclones; valueof2.2±1.4mg
HumanNAT dryextract/ml
clones
Neergaard Leaves Ethanol Ratbrain Fractionscontaining — — —
etal.(2010) (−)-loliolideshowed
gooddisplacement
of[3H]-citalopram
fromtheSERT
Scadoxus Bay-Smidt Bulbs Methanol Ratbrains, Showedaffinitytothe — — —
puniceus etal.(2011) except SERTproteinwith
cerebellum IC50 >50μg/ml
Sceletium Harveyetal. Above- 70% 5-HT1receptors; Extracthadamarked Nosignificanteffect Nosignificant Nosignificant
tortuosum (2011) ground ethanol, DATreceptors effect(>80% onthistransporter effectonthis effectonthis
parts 30%water inhibitionofbinding) transporter transporter
atthe5-HT
transporterbinding
site
Coetzee Unspecified Unspecified Human — Inastrocytes, — —
etal.(2016) astrocytesand extracthad
GT1-7cells comparableeffects
tocitalopram.In
GT1-7cells,similar
effectsto
citalopram,but
camebyslower
Xysmalobium Pedersen Unspecified Ethanol Wholeratbrain; Extractsinhibitedthe Nosignificanteffect Nosignificant Nosignificant
undulatum etal.(2008) HumanSERT bindingof[3H]- onthistransporter effectonthis effectonthis
clones;Human citalopramwithIC transporter transporter
50
DATclones; =1.1±2.3mgdry
HumanNAT extract/ml
clones
Nielsen Allparts Ethanoland Ratbrainsfrom Extracthadmore — — —
etal.(2004) water maleWistarrats than50%ofthe
transportprotein
bound[3H]
citalopramatthe
threehighest
concentrations
ratsormiceareindividuallyhungbythetailusingadhesivetapeand fortherecordingoflightbeaminterruptionsandthenumberoflight
attachedtotheedgeofatabletophangingabout75cmabovethefloor. beamcrossingsarecounted(Pedersenetal.,2008).Imipraminewas
Thetotal duration of immobility (the absence ofany limbor body used for positive control and Tween 80:water (1:10) was used as
movements) is then recorded manually during the 6min session negativecontrolinallthethreeinvivostudies(Pedersenetal.,2008).
(Pedersenetal.,2008).DifferencesthatcanbenotedbetweentheFST A total of 24 plants, including Adiantum capillus-veneris,
and the TST the response to drugs in both tests and the apparent Agapanthus campanulatus, Albizia adianthifolia, Artemisia
increasedsensitivityoftheTST(Machadoetal.,2009).Thelocomotor dracunculus, Boophone disticha and Cannabis sativa have been
activity test involves recording the spontaneous activity of animals investigatedininvivomodels(Table5).Mostoftheinvivostudies
treatedwiththeplantextractsinphotoresistoractometers.Miceorrats were conducted using the rodent forced swimming test. Ethanol
areindividuallyplacedinactometersilluminatedbytwolightbeams extractsfromAlbiziaadianthifolia,Rosmarinusofficinalis,Sceletium
FrontiersinPharmacology|www.frontiersin.org 25 June2022|Volume13|Article895286

## Page 26

Bonokwaneetal. SouthAfricanAntidepressantPlants
TABLE5|Differentinvivoassaysutilizedforinvestigatingtheantidepressantpotentialofmedicinalplants.
Plantspecies References Plantpart Solvent Model Forced Tail Open-field
used swimming suspensiontest(TST) test(OFT)
test(FST)
Adiantum Ahmadpoor Wholeplant Ethanol MaleBALB/cmice Plantextract(100, — —
capillus-veneris etal.(2019) (25–30g) 200,and400mg/kg)
significantly
decreasedthe
immobilitytime
Rabieiand Wholeplant Ethanol Malerats(250–300g) Extract(200mg/kg) — —
Setorki(2019) significantlyreduced
immobilitytime
durationwhiledoses
of50and100mg/kg
hadnosignificant
effectonimmobility
Agapanthus Pedersen Unspecified Ethanol MalealbinoSwiss Extractexhibited Nosignificanteffects Noeffectonthe
campanulatus etal.(2008) mice(25–30g) antidepressant-like spontaneousactivityof
effectsatdoses250 miceorrats
and500mg/kgand
yielded74.4and
62.3%relative
immobility,
respectively
Pedersen Unspecified Ethanol MaleWistarrats Extractexhibitedno — —
etal.(2008) (220–300g);Male significanteffects
C57BL/6Jmice
(19–27g)
Albizia Aderibigbe Leaves Ethanol MaleSwissmice Extractsignificantly Extractsignificantly —
adianthifolia etal.(2018) reducedimmobility reducedimmobilitytime
timeatdoses atdose1.25mg/kg
1.25mg/kg(40.8± (85.2±8.9)compared
13.1)and2.50mg/kg tocontrol(142.6±3.9)
(42.4±9.7) [p˂0.05]
comparedtocontrol
(170.0±10.1)
[p˂0.05]
Beppeetal. Leaves Distilled Wistarrats Bothdosesexhibited — —
(2015) water (350±50g) significanteffects
evidencedbythe
swimmingtime
(F(3,36)=21.09,p<
0.0001)andthe
immobilitytime
(F(3,36)=78.59,p<
0.0001)
Artemisia Jahanietal. Aerialparts Ethanol MaleSwissmiceand Atdoses100,200, Extractatthedosesof Extractdecreased
dracunculus (2019) maleNMRImice and400mg/kg, 100and200mg/kg immobilitytimein
(8–12weeks; ethanolicextract decreasedimmobility Swissmicetreated
18–25g) decreasedimmobility time(124.00±6.58, with100mg/kg
time(162.30±6.87, 117.20±2.50s,
161.60±5.54,and respectively).No
153.60±6.87s, significanteffectatdose
respectively) 400mg/kg
Ilkhanizadeh Whole Ethanol AdultfemaleNMRI Extract(50mg/kg) Extract(50mg/kg) Extractatdoses25
etal.(2021) plants mice significantlyreduced significantlyreduced and50mg/kg
depressioninduced depressioninduced significantlyincreased
immobilitytimein immobilitytime thenumberofcrossing
comparisontoOVX (p<0.05) inOFTtest
group(p<0.05)
(Continuedonfollowingpage)
FrontiersinPharmacology|www.frontiersin.org 26 June2022|Volume13|Article895286

## Page 27

Bonokwaneetal. SouthAfricanAntidepressantPlants
TABLE5|(Continued)Differentinvivoassaysutilizedforinvestigatingtheantidepressantpotentialofmedicinalplants.
Plantspecies References Plantpart Solvent Model Forced Tail Open-field
used swimming suspensiontest(TST) test(OFT)
test(FST)
Boophone Pedersen Unspecified Ethanol MalealbinoSwiss Extractexhibitedan Atadoseof125mg/kg, Noeffectonthe
disticha etal.(2008) mice(25–30g) antidepressant-like extractsignificantly spontaneousactivityof
activityatdoses250 exhibitedan miceorrats
and500mg/kgand antidepressant-like
yielded84.9and activity
83.3%relative
immobility,
respectively
Pedersen Unspecified Ethanol MaleWistarrats Extractexhibitedan — —
etal.(2008) (220–300g);Male antidepressant-like
C57BL/6Jmice activityatdose
(19–27g) 250mg/kgand
yielded74.2%relative
immobility
Cannabissativa Zanelateetal. Unspecified Unspecified MaleSwissmice CBDtreatment — —
(2010) (20–25g) reducedimmobility
time(F6,59=3.89,
p<0.01)atdose
30mg/kg
El-Alfyetal. Buds Hexaneand 8weeksoldmale Δ9-THCshowed Δ9-THCresultedin —
(2010) water SwissWebstermice significantoverall significantdecreasein
(24–30g);8weeksold reductionin immobilitytime(F[3,32]
adultmaleDBA/2mice immobilitytime(F =3.29;p=0.033).CBC
(19–23g) [3,35]=8.32;p= resultedinsignificant
0.0003).Δ8-THChad reductioninimmobility
nosignificanteffect time(F[3,33]=6.24;p=
onimmobilitytime(F 0.002).CBDdidnot
[3,44]=2.14;p= affectimmobilitytimeat
0.11).CBDrevealeda anyofthedoses(F[3,33]
significantdecrease =0.59;p=0.623)
inimmobilitytime(F
[3,42]=3.89;p=
0.015)
Salesetal. Unspecified Unspecified MaleSwissmice CBDatdose — Nosignificanteffecton
(2018) (8weeks) 10mg/kg thelocomotoractivity
significantlyreduced intheopen-fieldtest
theimmobilitytimein
theFST(F3,25=
6.104,p<0.05)
Centellaasiatica Selvietal. Wholeplant Ethanoland MaleWisterrats Theextractatboth — —
(2012) distilledwater (8weeksold) dosesexhibited
significantreduction
inimmobilitytime
comparedtocontrol
Ceremuga Unspecified Unspecified MaleSpragueDawley Asiaticacid(AA)from — —
etal.(2015) rats(250–300g) Centellaasiaticahad
nosignificanteffect
onimmobilitytime.
Significanteffect
(1.8),(p=0.001)in
thefaecalpellet
output(FPO)
(Continuedonfollowingpage)
FrontiersinPharmacology|www.frontiersin.org 27 June2022|Volume13|Article895286

## Page 28

Bonokwaneetal. SouthAfricanAntidepressantPlants
TABLE5|(Continued)Differentinvivoassaysutilizedforinvestigatingtheantidepressantpotentialofmedicinalplants.
Plantspecies References Plantpart Solvent Model Forced Tail Open-field
used swimming suspensiontest(TST) test(OFT)
test(FST)
Kalshetty Leaves 5Lof MaleSpragueDawley — — INDCA(3,10or
etal.(2012) isopropyl rats(250–270g) 30mg/kg)significantly
alcohol reducedthe
ambulationscores
(30.3,51.2and64.7%;
p<0.001)intheopen
filedtest.INDCA
(30mg/kg)showed
significant(p<0.01)
reductionofrearing
score(12.8,reduction
of47.5%).INDCA
(30mg/kg)treatment
reducedthegrooming
scoreby33.3%
Cinnamomum Rabadiaetal. Bark Ethanol Swissalbinomice Ratsshowed Ratsshowedsignificant —
camphora (2013) (18–30g) significantdecrease decreaseintheir
intheirimmobility immobilitytimesatall
timesatallthree threedoses(133.3±
doses(116.7± 8.758,128.3±8.33;p<
6.146,110.8± 0.05and122.5±8.342;
12.54;p<0.05and p<0.01),respectively
101.7±9.458;p<
0.01),respectively
Cymbopogon Victoriaetal. Unspecified Ethanol AdultmaleSwiss Nosignificanteffects Nosignificanteffectson Nosignificanteffecton
nardus (2014) albinomice(25–35g; inthemouseFST. mouseTST exploratoryand
2–3monthsold) locomotoractivitiesof
mice
Datura Devietal. Leaves Distilled Adultmalealbinomice Extractcauseda — Theextract
stramonium (2012) water (26–32g) significantincreasein significantlydecreased
immobilitytime(p˂ thelocomotoractivity
0.05for20mg/kg,p˂ whencomparedwith
0.01for40mg/kg) thecontrol.For
20mg/kg(p<0.05)
andfor40mg/kg(p<
0.001)
Hoodiagordonii Citóetal. Unspecified Unspecified MaleSwissmice Significantlyreduced — Extractdidnotalter
(2015) (25–30g) immobilitytimeof locomotoractivity
animalsafteracute wheneitherdosewas
administrationofH. used
gordoniiatdosesof
25and50mg/kg.
Animalstreatedfor15
consecutivedaysat
dosesof25mg/kg
and50mg/kgalso
reducedimmobility
time
Hypericum Tianetal. Unspecified Unspecified MaleSwissmice Adhyperforin Adhyperforin(16mg/kg) Adhyperforinhadno
perforatum (2014) (18–22g) (16mg/kg) significantlyreducedthe significanteffecton
significantly immobilitytimesofmice spontaneous
decreasedthe (p=0.043) locomotoractivityin
immobilitytimesof miceatanydose
miceintheFST(p= tested
0.049)
(Continuedonfollowingpage)
FrontiersinPharmacology|www.frontiersin.org 28 June2022|Volume13|Article895286

## Page 29

Bonokwaneetal. SouthAfricanAntidepressantPlants
TABLE5|(Continued)Differentinvivoassaysutilizedforinvestigatingtheantidepressantpotentialofmedicinalplants.
Plantspecies References Plantpart Solvent Model Forced Tail Open-field
used swimming suspensiontest(TST) test(OFT)
test(FST)
Öztürketal. Aerialparts 50%ethyl Adultmalealbinomice Driedplantextract — Driedplantextracts
(1996) alcohol (30–45g) fromaerialpartsof fromtheaerialpartsof
Hypericum Hypericumperforatum
perforatum decreasedthewalking
decreasedthe timetoastatistically
swimming significantextent
performancetoa (p<0.05)
statisticallysignificant
extent(p<0.05)
Ramalhete Aerialparts Methanol Malehsd:icrmice Extractshowedno Extractshowednon- —
etal.(2016) (28–34g) significanteffects significanteffectslike
thoseofthecontrol
Fiebichetal. Aerialparts Ethanoland Unspecified Hypericumextract — —
(2011) water exertedasignificant
inhibitoryeffectonthe
Immobilityoftherats
atdoses180and
360mg/kg(p<0.01)
Hypericum Ejiguand Leaves Methanol Wistarmalerats Extractsignificantly Extractatdosesof200 Extractfailedto
revolutum Engidawork, (7–10weeks, broughtdown (44%,p<0.01)and produceany
(2014) 180–230g);Maleand immobilitytimeat 400mg/kg(49%,p< significantalterationin
femaleSwissAlbino both200mg/kg 0.01)significantly theparameters
mice(7–10weeks, (33.72%,p<0.05) reducedimmobilitytime, measuredintheOFT
22–32g) and400mg/kg 100mg/kgdidnotshow
(38.42%,p<0.01) anysignificantchange
Maerua Bennehetal. Stembark Petroleum MaleICRmice Maeruaangolensis Maeruaangolensis —
angolensis (2018) ether/ethyl (20–25g) extract(1000mg/kg) extractat1000mg/kg
acetate(50: significantly significantlydecreased
50)mixture decreasedthe theimmobilitytime(F3
immobilitytimeand 20=5.744,p=0.0053).
increasedswimming Significanteffecton
time(F3,38=10.33, durationatdose
p<0.0001)ofmice 300mgkg(F3,20=
3.493,p=0.0347)
Meliaazedarach Ishaq,(2016) Flowers, Methanol MaleandfemaleNMRI 15mg/kgdose — —
twigsand mice(20–30g) significantly(22.7%,
roots p<0.005)decreased
immobilitytime
Menthaspicata Jedietal. Unspecified Unspecified Malemice Essentialoil(120and Essentialoilatdoses —
(2017) 240mg/kg)reduced 1207240mg/kg
immobilitytimein reducedimmobilitytime
mice inmice
Mondiawhitei Pedersen Unspecified Ethanol MalealbinoSwiss Extractexhibitedno Nosignificanteffects Noeffectonthe
etal.(2008) mice(25–30g) significanteffects spontaneousactivityof
miceorrats
Pedersen Unspecified Ethanol MaleWistarrats Extractexhibitedan — —
etal.(2008) (220–300g);Male antidepressant-like
C57BL/6Jmice activityatdose
(19–27g) 250mg/kgand
yielded69.9%relative
immobility
Oleaeuropaea Badretal. Unspecified Unspecified Malemice(20–25g) Immobilitytimeswere Oleuropeintreatmentat Immobilitytime
subsp.cuspidata (2020) significantlyreduced doses8,16and significantlydecreased
byOleuropeinat 32mg/kgsignificantly witholeuropeinat
8mg/kg(p<0.01), decreasedthe 8mg/kg(p<0.01),
16mg/kg(p<0.001) immobilitytimeinTST 16mg/kg(p<0.001)
and32mg/kg(p< and32mg/kg(p<
0.001) 0.001)
(Continuedonfollowingpage)
FrontiersinPharmacology|www.frontiersin.org 29 June2022|Volume13|Article895286

## Page 30

Bonokwaneetal. SouthAfricanAntidepressantPlants
TABLE5|(Continued)Differentinvivoassaysutilizedforinvestigatingtheantidepressantpotentialofmedicinalplants.
Plantspecies References Plantpart Solvent Model Forced Tail Open-field
used swimming suspensiontest(TST) test(OFT)
test(FST)
Perveenetal. Unspecified Unspecified MalealbinoWistarrats Significantincreasein — —
(2013) (140–280g) strugglingtime(p<
0.05)following
repeated
administrationof
extra-virginoliveoil
Tariqetal. Fruit Ethanol Sprague–Dawleyrats Greenandblackolive Greenandblackolive —
(2021) (200–250g) extractsignificantly extracttreatment
reducedthe displayedless
immobilityperiod immobilitytimeinTST
Rosmarinus Machado Stemsand Ethanol MaleSwissmice Thepercentof Thepercentageof Extract(1–300mg/kg,
officinalis etal.(2009) leaves (60–80daysold; reductioninthe reductioninimmobility p.o.)didnot
40–50g) immobilitytimewas timewas22.9%,28.0% significantlyalterthe
49.5%inFSTwith inTST,one-wayANOVA numberoftherearings
one-wayANOVA revealedasignificant ofmiceinOFT
revealingasignificant effectoftheextract
effectoftheextract (10–100mg/kg)inTST
(100mg/kg)inFST [F(4,29)=6.80,Pb0.01]
[F(4,31)=6.24,
Pb0.01]
Sasakietal. Leaves Ethanol MaleICRmice — Immobilitytimeswere —
(2013) (3weeksold;35–40g) decreasedto91.98±
12.06sfor50mg/kg
and66.81±17.00sfor
100mg/kg
Sasakietal. Wholeplant Ethanoland MaleICRmice — While100mg/kg —
(2021) citricacid (8weeksold) significantlydecreased
crystal immobilitytimefromday
2onwards,10mg/kg
onlyhaddecreasein
immobilitytimeatday7
Abdelhalim Wholeplant Petroleum MaleSwissmice Salvigenin,rosmanol Salvigenin,rosmanol —
etal.(2015) ether,ethanol (20–30g) andcirsimaritin(30 andcirsimaritin(30and
andethyl and100mg/kg) 100mg/kg)causeda
acetate significantly significantdecreasein
decreasedthe theimmobilitytimeas
immobilitytimeinthe comparedtothevehicle
FSTascomparedto controlgroup(p<0.05;
thecontrol(vehicle) p<0.01)
(p<0.05;p<0.001)
Securidaca Adebiyietal. Roots Distilled Swissalbinomice Aqueousextract — —
longipedunculata (2006) water (25–30g) significantly
decreasedduration
ofimmobility(p<
0.05)atthedoseof
400mg/kg
Sceletium Loriaetal. Leaves Methanoland MaleSpragueDawley S.tortuosumextract — —
tortuosum (2014) chloroform rats(175–200g, significantly
6–7weeksold decreasedfloating
timeofrats
Schinusmolle Machado Stems, Hexane MaleSwissmice — Extractsignificantly Extractatdoserange
etal.(2007) leaves (35–45g) decreasedthe 100–600mg/kghad
immobilitytimeatall nosignificanteffecton
doses.One-way locomotoractivityof
ANOVArevealeda miceascomparedto
significanteffect[F(4,25) controlgroup.One-
=11.14,Pb0.01] wayANOVArevealed
[F(3,18)=1.38,
p=0.27]
(Continuedonfollowingpage)
FrontiersinPharmacology|www.frontiersin.org 30 June2022|Volume13|Article895286

## Page 31

Bonokwaneetal. SouthAfricanAntidepressantPlants
TABLE5|(Continued)Differentinvivoassaysutilizedforinvestigatingtheantidepressantpotentialofmedicinalplants.
Plantspecies References Plantpart Solvent Model Forced Tail Open-field
used swimming suspensiontest(TST) test(OFT)
test(FST)
Xysmalobium Pedersen Unspecified Ethanol MalealbinoSwiss Extractexhibitedan Nosignificanteffects Noeffectonthe
undulatum etal.(2008) mice(25–30g) antidepressant-like spontaneousactivityof
activityatdosesof miceorrats
250and500mg/kg
andyielded77.6%
67.9%relative
immobility,
respectively
Pedersen Unspecified MaleWistarrats Extractexhibitedno — —
etal.(2008) (220–300g);Male significanteffects
C57BL/6Jmice
(19–27g)
Ziziphus Keugong Leaves Methanoland AdultmaleWistarrats Chronictreatment — —
mucronata Wado,etal. distilledwater withZiziphus
(2020) mucronataatboth
dosessignificantly
reverseddepressive
behavior([F(5,27)=
6.284;p<0.0005]
loweringinswimming
timeand[F(5,27)=
10.44;p<0.0001]
increaseinimmobility
time)
tortuosumandZiziphusmucronataexhibitedantidepressantactivity scientificrationalefortheutilizationofthesepharmacological
in vivo. Ethanolic extracts from Boophone disticha exhibited assays. Furthermore, we provides insight on the plant parts
antidepressant-like effects in the FST and TST (Pedersen et al., and solvents used in the preparation of anti-depressive plant
2008). Previously isolated from B. disticha, buphanamine and extracts for pharmacological investigation.
buphanadrine structurally have the benzo-1,3-dioxole moiety in
common with SSRI paroxetine, which could explain the observed
Toxicity and Safety of South African Plants
anti-depressant-likeproperties(Sandageretal.,2005;Neergaardetal.,
2009;Staffordetal.,2013),supportingthetraditionaluseofthisplant Used for Managing Depression
to treat mental disorders (Hutchings et al., 1996). Cannabis sativa South Africa has a richdiversity ofmedicinalplants, however, this
cannabinoids Δ9-THC, CBD and CBC induced significant richfloraincludesseveralplantswiththepotentialtopoisonhumans
antidepressant-like effects in animal models of depression (FST (NairandVanStaden,2013;Ndhlalaetal.,2013).Ashighlightedin
and TST) (El-Alfy et al., 2010; Zanelate et al., 2010). A study into Table6,therearesafetyconcernsforsomeoftheSouthAfricanplants
CBD-inducedantidepressant-likeeffectsintheFSTrevealedthatthe with anti-depressant potential. Among the listed plants, Boophone
antidepressant effects depend on levels of serotonin, but not disticha, Haemanthus coccineus and Scadoxus puniceus have the
noradrenaline, inthe CNS(Zanelateetal., 2010;Salesetal., 2018). isoquinoline alkaloids as the toxic compound characterized by
This serves as rationale for the traditional use of C. sativa to treat symptoms such as dizziness (Ndhlala et al., 2013). In South
depressivementalconditions(Hutchingsetal.,1996;VanWyketal., Africa,traditional medicineprescription and usewas not regulated
1997).Oleuropein, whichisconsidered the most activephenolicin inthepast.Itisalsoassociatedwiththedangersofmisadministration,
ingredientOleaeuropaeasubsp.cuspidata,significantlyreducedlevels and the potential long-term genotoxic effects that follow the
ofserotoninanddopamineandexhibitedantidepressant-likeeffectsin prolonged use of self-prescribed popular herbal medicines (Fennell
theFST,TSTandOFT(Badretal.,2020). etal.,2004).Poisonousplantscanleadtosymptomssuchasserious
The most extensively studied plants included Agapanthus poisoningwheningestedorirritationand/ordiscomfortaftercontact
campanulatus, Boophone disticha, Hypericum perforatum, withtheskin(Hutchingsetal.,1996;VanWyketal.,1997).Adverse
Mondia whitei and Xysmalobium undulatum. These plants effectsmayincludehallucinations,sedation,irrationalbehaviorand
were investigated in all the bioassays included in this study. more seriously coma and death (Van Wyk et al., 1997). Toxic
Based on the plant parts screened, leaf extracts for 11 plants substances from medicinal plants can affect important human
(Agapanthus campanulatus, Boophone disticha, Mondia organs while some are able to affect functional systems of the
whitei, Albizia adianthifolia, Centella asiatica, Rosmarinus body, like the central nervous system (CNS), and interfere with
officinalis, Sceletium tortuosum, Hypericum revolutum, the nerve function coordination of the body (Ndhlala et al., 2013).
Datura stramonium, Schinus molle and Ziziphus mucronata) Acomprehensivereviewontheethnopharmacologyandtoxicology
demonstrated antidepressant activity. These studies serve as ofalkaloidsoftheAmaryllidaceaeofSouthAfricahasbeenpublished
FrontiersinPharmacology|www.frontiersin.org 31 June2022|Volume13|Article895286

## Page 32

Bonokwaneetal. SouthAfricanAntidepressantPlants
TABLE6|Toxicity,sideeffectsandsafetyindicationofSouthAfricanmedicinalplantsusedtraditionallytomanagedepressionandrelatedailments.
Plantspecies Toxicity Sideeffects Safetyindication References
Agapanthus Noreportedtoxicity Gastrointestinaltractandkidney — Ndhlalaetal.(2013)
campanulatus problems
Albiziaadianthifolia Noreportedtoxicity Noreportedsideeffects Leafextractsdonotinduce Beppeetal.(2015);Hutchings
neurotoxicityandthiseffectcouldbe etal.(1996);VanWyketal.
relatedtoitsantioxidantactivity (1997)
(increasedactivitiesofSOD,CAT,
GSHlevelandthedecreasedlevels
ofproteincarbonylandMDA
Artemisia Noreportedtoxicity Noreportedsideeffects Possiblemechanismforanxiolytic Ilkhanizadehetal.(2021);
dracunculus andantidepressanteffectsreported Khosravietal.(2017);
tobetheanti-oxidantactivityof Mumivandetal.(2017)
tarragon.Extractreducedtheserum
MDAwhileelevatedSODandGPX
levelsandhasprotectiveeffect
againstROSproductionand
oxidativestress
Boophonedisticha Bulbsarereportedtohavecaused Symptomsofnon-fataltoxicity Severalhumandeathshavebeen Hutchingsetal.(1996);
bothacuteandfatalpoisoningin includedrynessofthemouthand reportedduetoextremelytoxic Ndhlalaetal.(2011);VanWyk
humanbeings,followingmedicinal increasedthirst,nausea,vomiting, alkaloids.Internaluseisdangerous andGericke,(2000);VanWyk
administration impairedvision,andvariable andshouldbeavoided etal.(1997)
emotionalreactionsfollowedby
stuporandsleepforaboutanhour
Cannabissativa Toxiceffectsofprolongeduse Sideeffectsincludeincreasedheart Themousetetradassaydetermined El-Alfyetal.(2010);Hutchings
includelassitude,indifference,lack rate,palpitations,orthostatic thatΔ9-THCat2.5mg/kgdosein etal.(1996)
ofproductiveactivity,insomnia, hypotension,acutepanicreactions, boththeFSTandTSTdoesnot
headaches,nystagmus,increased mentalconfusion,depressionand causeanyimpairmentoflocomotor
susceptibilitytoinfections, paranoia.Acutetoxicpsychosisin activity,changeinbodytemperature
gastrointestinaldisturbances,sexual someusers orcatalepsy
impotenceandpersonalitychanges
Centellaasiatica Noreportedtoxicity Noreportedsideeffects — Kalshettyetal.(2012);Van
WykandGericke,(2000)
Cinnamomum Deathfromrespiratorycausesisrare Largedosesofthisplantcause Smalldoseswarmandsoothethe Hutchingsetal.(1996);
camphora howeveruseasaninhalantfor nauseaandvomitingwhilehigh epigastricregion Rabadiaetal.(2013);Van
children,orinlargeamountsshould dosesproduceepileptiform Wyketal.(1997)
beavoidedasitmaycausesystemic convulsions
toxicity.Seedscontaincytotoxic
proteinscamphorinandcinnamomin
Cymbopogon Noreportedtoxicity Noreportedsideeffects Thetreatmentofmicewith(R)- Victoriaetal.(2014)
nardus Citronellaldidnotcausedeathofany
animalsanddemonstratedlackof
toxicologicaleffects
Daturaferox Allplantpartsaretoxic Pupildilation,convulsion,tremorand — Kovatsisetal.(1993)
appetitedepression.Toxicityin
livestockcausesreductioninbody
weight,hypersalivationandan
alteredgait
Daturastramonium Poisoningfromcookedleaves. Severementalconfusion, Thereexistsdangersofharmfulside Devietal.(2012);Hutchings
Ingestionoftheseedsproduces hallucinations,insomnia,increased effectsandself-medicationwithout etal.(1996);Ndhlalaetal.
similareffectstoCannabispoisoning heartrateanddecreasedsalivadue medicaladviceisnotrecommended (2013);VanWyketal.(1997)
inchildren.Studieshaveshownit toatropine,tropane,andhyoscine
haspotentialtocausedamagetothe alkaloids.Blurredvision,suppressed
ultrastructureofthebraincells salivation,vasodilation,hallucinations
anddelirium
Haemanthus AllmembersofgenusHaemanthus Sideeffectshavenotbeenreported — Bay-Smidtetal.(2011);
coccineus areconsideredcapableofcausing Staffordetal.(2013)
dermatitis
(Continuedonfollowingpage)
FrontiersinPharmacology|www.frontiersin.org 32 June2022|Volume13|Article895286

## Page 33

Bonokwaneetal. SouthAfricanAntidepressantPlants
TABLE6|(Continued)Toxicity,sideeffectsandsafetyindicationofSouthAfricanmedicinalplantsusedtraditionallytomanagedepressionandrelatedailments.
Plantspecies Toxicity Sideeffects Safetyindication References
Hoodiagordonii Hasanorecticeffects(producesloss Experimentsresultedindecreasein — VanWyketal.(1997)
ofappetite) foodconsumptionandbodymassof
ratsandanincreaseinATPinthe
hypothalamus
Hypericum Noreportedtoxicityassociatedwith Photosensitivitymayoccurinfair- — Öztürketal.(1996);
perforatum internaluse skinnedusers,especiallyunderfairly Ramalheteetal.(2016);Tian
strongsunshine etal.(2014);VanWyketal.
(1997)
Maeruaangolensis Seizureinductionpotentialinmice Physicalsignssuchastonicand/or — Bennehetal.(2018)
clonicconvulsionswereobserved
duringtheIrwintest
Meliaazedarach Significantpoisoningmayoccurafter Anuria,severestomatitisandviolent Gastriclavage,eggwhitesandmilk Hutchingsetal.(1996)
largeamountsofthefruithavebeen andsanguineousvomiting,nausea, forshocktreatmentand
ingested.Allplantpartsarereported anddiarrhoea,followedby,mental symptomaticmeasuresare
tobetoxic.Fatalpoisoningfromthe confusionandstupor,respiratory recommendedtreatpoisoning
fruitandbark problems,convulsionsandpartialto
completeparalysis
Mondiawhitei Noreportedtoxicity Noreportedsideeffects Mondiaisreasonablyexpectedto Aremuetal.(2011);
besafewhenpreparedandused Koorbanallyetal.(2000b);
accordingtotraditionalpractices Neergaardetal.(2010)
Oleaeuropaea Noreportedtoxicity Gastricsymptomsmayoccurdueto Significantlydecreasedthe Hutchingsetal.(1996);Tariq
subsp.cuspidata anirritanteffectonthemucosa. antioxidantpoolofrat’sbrain etal.(2021)
Therefore,plantmedicineshould
alwaysbetakenaftermeals
Rosmarinus Doseranges50–200mg/kgof Noreportedsideeffects Protectneuronalcellsagainst Abdelhalimetal.(2015);
officinalis Salvigenin,rosmanolandcirsimaritin corticosterone-inducedtoxicity. Sasakietal.(2013)
didnotproduceanytoxicityeffects Extractimprovedcellviability30%
invitro
Scadoxuspuniceus Humandeathsandpoisoninghave Symptomsofnon-fatalpoisoning — Ndhlalaetal.(2013);VanWyk
beenreported fromthebulbsorleavesinclude etal.(1997)
visualdisturbances,dizzinessand
CNSexcitationordepression.
Hypotensionandconvulsion
Sceletium Notoxicityreported Intoxicatingdosescancause Nosevereadverseeffectshave GerickeandViljoen(2008);
tortuosum euphoria beendocumented Harveyetal.(2011);VanWyk
etal.(1997)
Securidaca Securinineistoxic.Overdosesare — — VanWykandGericke(2000);
longipedunculata potentiallylethalandsuicidalusehas VanWyketal.(1997)
beendocumented
Xysmalobium Lowtoxicity Severegastrointestinalirritationfrom — VanWykandGericke(2000);
undulatum protractedpoisoning VanWyketal.(1997)
Ziziphusmucronata Lowtoxicity.Fruitistoxicbutis — — Hutchingsetal.(1996);Van
considerededibleandisusedfor Wyketal.(1997)
porridge.Extractsfromleaveshave
shownpotentialgenotoxicactivity
SOD,Superoxidedismutase;GPX,Glutathioneperoxidase;CAT,Catalase;GSH,Glutathione;MDA,Malondialdehyde;ROS,Reactiveoxygenspecies.
(NairandVanStaden,2013).Boophonedistichaisamongstthefirst administration of this plant include an unsteady gait, dryness of
recordedtoxicplantstohavecausedfatalitiesduetopoisoningafter themouthandincreasedthirst,nausea,vomiting,impairedvisionand
consumptionbySotho,XhosaandZulupeoplefromSouthAfricaor variableemotionalreactionsfollowedbystuporandsleepforaboutan
whenitsbulbswereusedasarrowpoisonsbytheKhoiandSan,andis hour(Hutchingsetal.,1996).TheprolongeduseofCannabissativa
themostwidelystudiedforitstoxiceffects(Hutchingsetal.,1996; has toxic effects that include indifference, insomnia, lassitude,
NairandVanStaden,2013).Manyinjurieshaveresultedfromthe headaches, increased susceptibility to infections, sexual impotence,
toxic use of this plant (Sobiecki, 2002). Symptoms of non-fatal gastrointestinal disturbances, and personality changes (Hutchings
FrontiersinPharmacology|www.frontiersin.org 33 June2022|Volume13|Article895286

## Page 34

Bonokwaneetal. SouthAfricanAntidepressantPlants
et al., 1996). Side effects of regular use include heart palpitations, ledtotheidentificationandisolationof24phytochemicals,including
orthostatic hypotension, acute panic reactions, mental confusion, buphanidrine,buphanamine,distichamine,cannabidiol,asiaticoside,
depression paranoia and acute toxic psychosis in some users adhyperforin, hypericin and loliolide, of anti-depressive value. On
(Hutchings et al., 1996). The seeds of Cinnamomum camphora, the basis of the pharmacological and phytochemical data
commonly known as camphor bush, contain cytotoxic proteins reviewed, medicinal plant extracts may contain more novel
camphorin and cinnamomin that cause systemic toxicity when phytochemicals that can improve antidepressant therapy with a
used as an inhalant for children, or in large amounts (Hutchings more rapid onset of antidepressant action and minimized side
etal.,1996;VanWyketal.,1997). effects. This review provides a useful foundation for the
investigation of pharmacological antidepressant-like effects of
plants used traditionally without pharmacological validation.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE Furthermore, it will stimulate the development of new
PERSPECTIVES pharmacotherapies derived from plant extracts for use in the
clinical treatment of depression. Future research of the
SouthAfricahasarichdiversityofplantsthathavebeenrecordedfor antidepressant effects of South African medicinal plants should be
thetreatmentofMDD.Thesystematicreviewof20ethnobotanical exploredandvalidatedusingadditionalmodelsofdepressionwith
recordsledtothedocumentationof186medicinalplantsfrom63 theaimofdiscoveringplantspeciesandnovelcompoundseffectiveat
families used locally for the treatment of MDD and MDD-com. treatingMDD.Simultaneousevaluationoftheethnopharmacology
MostoftheplantswerefromAsteraceae,Fabaceae,Amaryllidaceae and phytochemistry of medicinal plants used traditionally for
and Apocynaceae. These families have demonstrated rationale of depression provides a useful framework for the selection of
their extensive use in traditional medicine given the presence of potential candidate species for drug discovery based on traditional
uniquebioactivephytochemicalswithantidepressant-likeproperties useandthepresenceofphytochemicalswithantidepressanteffects.
inplantsbelongingtothesefamilies.Alargenumberoftheliterature Overall,Asteraceae,Fabaceae,AmaryllidaceaeandApocynaceaemay
reviewedlistedlocalusesofmedicinalplantsforsomaticsymptoms holdplantspecieswithphytochemicalscapableofeffectivelytreating
describedasmentalhealthrelatedproblems,suchasheadache,that MDDanditsassociatedsymptoms.
couldbeclassifiedasdepressionbasedonsimilarclinicalsymptoms.
The overlap and comorbidity observed between depression and
headache in studies using humans provide evidence of a link AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
between medicinal plants used traditionally for headache and the
potentialantidepressanteffectsofthoseplants.Thislinkcanbeseen This review was conducted by MBB with guidance and
with plants such as Boophone disticha, Scadoxus puniceus, conceptualisation by ML and AOA. MS assisted with the
Maerua angolensis and Mentha spicata, which are listed in confirmation of scientific plant names and plant families. MBB
ethnobotanicalliteratureastraditionalmedicinefor headache,but compiledthefinalmanuscriptunderthesupervisionofML,MS,
also exhibited antidepressant-like effects in pharmacological and AOA.
studies reviewed in this paper. Moreover, Sceletium tortuosum,
Xysmalobium undulatum, Cannabis sativa, Schinus molle and
Hypoxis hemerocallidea represent some of the plants with FUNDING
reported ethnopharmacological uses for both depression and
headache and have been validated for their antidepressant-like This work is based on the research supported wholly by the
activity, suggesting that medicinal plants used National Research Foundation of South Africa (Grant Number:
ethnopharmacologically for headache may have some degree of UID 129 870; and MND 2104 095 93265). Additional financial
antidepressant-likeeffectsworthinvestigating. support was provided by the North-West University
Despitetheextensiveuseof medicinalplantsforMDD-comin Postgraduate Bursary. Article Processing Charge was paid by
traditional medicine, pharmacological evidence validating the the Faculty of Natural and Agricultural Sciences, North-West
antidepressant action of most plants and the search for University, South Africa.
phytochemicals of anti-depressive novelty are limited. Only 27
plants (14.5%) have been investigated for their antidepressant-like
activity in in vitro and in vivo models of depression. Agapanthus ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
campanulatus, Boophone disticha, Hypericum perforatum, Mondia
whitei and Xysmalobium undulatum, were the most extensively We thank M. V. Chakale for his support and guidance in the
pharmacologicallystudiedbasedoninvestigationinallthemodels compilation of this review.
of depression reviewed in this paper. A total of nine plants were
investigated in four in vitro models of depression, while 23 plants
wereinvestigatedusinginvivomodelsofdepression.Nineoutofthe SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
27 plants, including Boophone disticha, Mondia whitei, Cannabis
sativa,HypericumperforatumandRosmarinusofficinalisunderwent TheSupplementaryMaterialforthisarticlecanbefoundonlineat:
a further phytochemical investigation to identify the bioactive https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fphar.2022.895286/
compounds responsible for their antidepressant-like effects. This full#supplementary-material
FrontiersinPharmacology|www.frontiersin.org 34 June2022|Volume13|Article895286

## Page 35

Bonokwaneetal. SouthAfricanAntidepressantPlants
REFERENCES DeBeer,J.J.J.,andVanWyk,B.-E.(2011).AnEthnobotanicalSurveyoftheAgter-
Hantam, Northern Cape Province, South Africa. South Afr. J. Bot. 77 (3),
741–754.doi:10.1016/j.sajb.2011.03.013
Abbas,G.,Rauf,K.,andMahmood,W.(2015).Saponins:thePhytochemicalwith Devi,M.R.,Bawari,M.,Paul,S.B.,andSharma,G.D.(2012).Characterizationof
anEmergingPotentialforCuringClinicalDepression.Nat.Prod.Res.29(4), the Toxic Effects Induced by Datura stramonium L. Leaves on Mice: A
302–307.doi:10.1080/14786419.2014.942661 Behavioural, Biochemical and Ultrastructural Approach. Asian J. Pharm.
Abdelhalim,A.,Karim,N.,Chebib,M.,Aburjai,T.,Khan,I.,Johnston,G.A.,etal. Clin.Res.5(3),143–146.
(2015). Antidepressant, Anxiolytic and Antinociceptive Activities of Dey,A.,Mukherjee,A.,andChaudhury,M.(2017).“AlkaloidsfromApocynaceae,”
Constituents from Rosmarinus officinalis. J. Pharm. Pharm. Sci. 18 (4), inStudiesinNaturalProductsChemistry.EditorR.Attaur,52,373–488.doi:10.
448–459.doi:10.18433/j3pw38 1016/b978-0-444-63931-8.00010-2
Adebiyi,R.A.,Elsa,A.T.,Agaie,B.M.,andEtuk,E.U.(2006).Antinociceptive Ejigu,A.,andEngidawork,E.(2014).ScreeningoftheAntidepressant-LikeActivity
and Antidepressant-Like Effects of Securidaca longepedunculata Root ofTwoHypericumSpeciesFoundinEthiopia.Eth.Pharm.J.30(1),21–32.
Extract in Mice. J. Ethnopharmacol. 107 (2), 234–239. doi:10.1016/j.jep. doi:10.4314/epj.v30i1.3
2006.03.017 El-Alfy,A.T.,Ivey,K.,Robinson,K.,Ahmed,S.,Radwan,M.,Slade,D.,etal.
Aderibigbe,A.O.(2018).AntidepressantActivityofEthanolExtractofAlbizia (2010). Antidepressant-like Effect of Δ9-Tetrahydrocannabinol and Other
adianthifolia(Schumach)W.F.WightLeafinMice.Afr.J.Med.Med.Sci.47 CannabinoidsIsolatedfromCannabissativaL.Pharmacol.Biochem.Behav.
(2),133–140. 95(4),434–442.doi:10.1016/j.pbb.2010.03.004
Ahmadpoor, J., Valipour Chahardahcheric, S., and Setorki, M. (2019). The Elgorashi, E. E. (2019). Phytochemistry and Pharmacology of the Family
Protective Effect of Hydroalcoholic Extract of the Southern Maidenhair Amaryllidaceae:AnOverviewofResearchatRCPGD.Nat.Prod.Commun.
Fern(Adiantumcapillus-veneris)ontheDepressionandAnxietyCausedby 14,1934578X1987292.doi:10.1177/1934578X19872929
ChronicStressinAdultMaleMice:AnExperimentalRandomizedStudy.Iran. Elisha,I.L.,Elgorashi,E.E.,Hussein,A.A.,Duncan,G.,andEloff,J.N.(2013).
Red.CrescentMed.J.21(3),e86750.doi:10.5812/ircmj.86750 Acetylcholinesterase Inhibitory Effects of the Bulb of Ammocharis coranica
Albert,P.R.(2015).WhyIsDepressionMorePrevalentinWomen?J.Psychiatry (Amaryllidaceae) anditsActiveConstituentLycorine.SouthAfr.J.Bot. 85,
Neurosci.40(4),219–221.doi:10.1503/jpn.150205 44–47.doi:10.1016/j.sajb.2012.11.008
Alrashedy,N.A.,andMolina,J.(2016).TheEthnobotanyofPsychoactivePlant Fathinezhad,Z.,Sewell,R.D.E.,Lorigooini,Z.,andRafieian-Kopaei,M.(2019).
Use:aPhylogeneticPerspective.PeerJ4,e2546.doi:10.7717/peerj.2546 Depression and Treatment with Effective Herbs. Curr. Pharm. Des. 25 (6),
American Psychiatric Association (2000). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 738–745.doi:10.2174/1381612825666190402105803
MentalDisorders.WashingtonD.C.:DSM-IV-TR. Fennell,C.W.,Lindsey,K.L.,McGaw,L.J.,Sparg,S.G.,Stafford,G.I.,Elgorashi,E.
Aremu,A.O.,Cheesman,L.,Finnie,J.F.,andVanStaden,J.(2011).Mondiawhitei E.,etal.(2004).AssessingAfricanMedicinalPlantsforEfficacyandSafety:
(Apocynaceae):AReviewofitsBiologicalActivities,ConservationStrategies Pharmacological Screening and Toxicology. J. Ethnopharmacol. 94 (2-3),
andEconomicPotential.SouthAfr.J.Bot.77(4),960–971.doi:10.1016/j.sajb. 205–217.doi:10.1016/j.jep.2004.05.012
2011.06.010 Ferrari,A.J.,Charlson,F.J.,Norman,R.E.,Patten,S.B.,Freedman,G.,Murray,C.
Badr,A.M.,Attia,H.A.,andAl-Rasheed,N.(2020).OleuropeinReversesRepeated J.,etal.(2013).BurdenofDepressiveDisordersbyCountry,Sex,Age,andYear:
Corticosterone-Induced Depressive-Like Behavior in Mice: Evidence of FindingsfromtheGlobalBurdenofDiseaseStudy2010.PLoSMed.10(11),
Modulating Effect on Biogenic Amines. Sci. Rep. 10 (1), 3336. doi:10.1038/ e1001547.doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1001547
s41598-020-60026-1 Fiebich, B. L., Knörle, R., Appel, K., Kammler, T., and Weiss, G. (2011).
Bay-Smidt,M.G.K.,Jäger,A.K.,Krydsfeldt,K.,Meerow,A.W.,Stafford,G.I.,Van PharmacologicalStudiesinanHerbalDrugCombinationofSt.John’sWort
Staden, J., et al. (2011). Phylogenetic Selection of Target Species in (Hypericumperforatum)andPassionFlower(Passifloraincarnata):InVitro
Amaryllidaceae Tribe Haemantheae for Acetylcholinesterase Inhibition and and In Vivo Evidence of Synergy between Hypericum and Passiflora in
AffinitytotheSerotoninReuptakeTransportProtein.SouthAfr.J.Bot.77, AntidepressantPharmacologicalModels.Fitoterapia82(3),474–480.doi:10.
175–183.doi:10.1016/j.sajb.2010.07.016 1016/j.fitote.2010.12.006
Benneh,C.K.,Biney,R.P.,Adongo,D.W.,Mante,P.K.,Ampadu,F.A.,Tandoh, Viladomat,V.,Bastida,J.,Codina,C.,Nair,J.,andCampbell,W.(1997).Alkaloids
A.,etal.(2018).AnxiolyticandAntidepressantEffectsofMaeruaangolensis of the South African Amaryllidaceae. In Recent Research Developments in
DC.StemBarkExtractinMice.DepressRes.Treat.2018,1537371.doi:10.1155/ Phytochemistry. Vol. 1, Pandali, SG . (Ed.). Research Signpost Publishers,
2018/1537371 Trivandrum,India.131–171.
Beppe,G.J.,Dongmo,A.B.,Foyet,H.S.,Dimo,T.,Mihasan,M.,andHritcu,L. Gericke, N., and Viljoen, A. M. (2008). Sceletium a Review Update. J.
(2015). The Aqueous Extract of Albizia adianthifolia Leaves Attenuates 6- Ethnopharmacol.119(3),653–663.doi:10.1016/j.jep.2008.07.043
Hydroxydopamine-InducedAnxiety,DepressionandOxidativeStressinRat Grabarczyk, M., Wińska, K., Mączka, W., Potaniec, B., and Anioł, M. (2015).
Amygdala.BMCComplement.Altern.Med.15(1),374.doi:10.1186/s12906- Loliolide-theMostUbiquitousLactone.ActaUniversitatisLodziensis.Folia
015-0912-0 Biol.EtOecolog.11,1–8.doi:10.1515/fobio-2015-0001
Bhat,R.B.,andJacobs,T.V.(1995).TraditionalHerbalMedicineinTranskei.J. Hamid,H.A.,Ramli,A.N.,andYusoff,M.M.(2017).IndoleAlkaloidsfromPlants
Ethnopharmacol.48(1),7–12.doi:10.1016/0378-8741(95)01276-J asPotentialLeadsforAntidepressantDrugs:AMiniReview.Front.Pharmacol.
Ceremuga,T.E.,Valdivieso,D.,Kenner,C.,Lucia,A.,Lathrop,K.,Stailey,O.,etal. 8,96.doi:10.3389/fphar.2017.00096
(2015).EvaluationoftheAnxiolyticandAntidepressantEffectsofAsiaticAcid, Harvey, A. L., Young, L. C., Viljoen, A. M., and Gericke, N. P. (2011).
aCompoundfromGotuKolaorCentellaasiatica,intheMaleSpragueDawley Pharmacological Actions of the South African Medicinal and Functional
Rat.AANAJ.83(2),91–98. Food Plant Sceletium tortuosum and its Principal Alkaloids. J.
Citó,M.C.,Silva,M.I.,Santos,L.K.,Fernandes,M.L.,Melo,F.H.,Aguiar,J.A., Ethnopharmacol.137(3),1124–1129.doi:10.1016/j.jep.2011.07.035
et al. (2015). Antidepressant-like Effect of Hoodia gordonii in a Forced Heinrich, M., Edwards, S., Moerman, D. E., and Leonti, M. (2009).
SwimmingTestinMice:EvidenceforInvolvementoftheMonoaminergic Ethnopharmacological Field Studies: A Critical Assessment of Their
System. Braz J. Med. Biol. Res. 48 (1), 57–64. doi:10.1590/1414- Conceptual Basis and Methods. J. Ethnopharmacol. 124 (1), 1–17. doi:10.
431X20144215 1016/j.jep.2009.03.043
Coetzee, D. D., López, V., and Smith, C. (2016). High-Mesembrine Sceletium Heinricha,M.,Appendinob,G.,Efferthc,T.,Fürst,R.,Izzoe,A.A.,andKayserf,O.
™
Extract(Trimesemine )IsaMonoamineReleasingAgent,ratherThanOnlya (2020). Best Practice in Research – Overcoming Common Challenges in
Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitor. J. Ethnopharmacol. 177, 111–116. Phytopharmacological Research. J. Ethnopharmacol. 246, 112230. doi:10.
doi:10.1016/j.jep.2015.11.034 1016/j.jep.2019.112230
Corrigan,B.M.,VanWyk,B.-E.,Geldenhuys,C.J.,andJardine,J.M.(2011). Helmstädter, A. (2015). Xysmalobium undulatum (Uzara) Research - How
EthnobotanicalPlantUsesintheKwaNibelaPeninsula,StLucia,SouthAfrica. Everything Began. J. Ethnopharmacol. 164, 385–387. doi:10.1016/j.jep.2014.
SouthAfr.J.Bot.77(2),346–359.doi:10.1016/j.sajb.2010.09.017 12.022
FrontiersinPharmacology|www.frontiersin.org 35 June2022|Volume13|Article895286

## Page 36

Bonokwaneetal. SouthAfricanAntidepressantPlants
Herman,A.A.,Stein,D.J.,Seedat,S.,Heeringa,S.G.,Moomal,H.,andWilliams, Loria,M.J.,Ali,Z.,Abe,N.,Sufka,K.J.,andKhan,I.A.(2014).EffectsofSceletium
D.R.(2009).TheSouthAfricanStressandHealth(SASH)Study:12-monthand tortuosuminRats.J.Ethnopharmacol.155(1),731–735.doi:10.1016/j.jep.2014.
LifetimePrevalenceofCommonMentalDisorders.SouthAfr.Med.J.99(5), 06.007
339–344. Machado,D.G.,Kaster,M.P.,Binfaré,R.W.,Dias,M.,Santos,A.R.,Pizzolatti,M.
Hulley,I.M.,andVanWyk,B.-E.(2019).QuantitativeMedicinalEthnobotanyof G.,etal.(2007).Antidepressant-likeEffectoftheExtractfromLeavesofSchinus
Kannaland(WesternLittleKaroo,SouthAfrica):Non-HomogeneityAmongst molleL.inMice:EvidencefortheInvolvementoftheMonoaminergicSystem.
Villages.SouthAfr.J.Bot.122,225–265.doi:10.1016/j.sajb.2018.03.014 Prog.Neuropsychopharmacol.Biol.Psychiatry31(2),421–428.doi:10.1016/j.
Hutchings, A., Scott, A. H., and Lewis, G. (1996). Zulu Medicinal Plants. An pnpbp.2006.11.004
Inventory.Pietermaritzburg,SouthAfrica:UniversityofNatalPress. Machado,D.G.,Bettio,L.E.,Cunha,M.P.,Capra,J.C.,Dalmarco,J.B.,Pizzolatti,
Hutchings,A.(1989).ASurveyandAnalysisofTraditionalMedicinalPlantsas M.G.,etal.(2009).Antidepressant-likeEffectoftheExtractofRosmarinus
UsedbytheZulu;XhosaandSotho.Bothalia19,112–123.doi:10.4102/abc. officinalis in Mice: Involvement of the Monoaminergic System. Prog.
v19i1.947 Neuropsychopharmacol. Biol. Psychiatry 33 (4), 642–650. doi:10.1016/j.
Ilkhanizadeh,A.,Asghari,A.,Hassanpour,S.,andSafi,S.(2021).Anti-depressant pnpbp.2009.03.004
Effect of Artemisia dracunculus Extract is Mediated via GABAergic and Mander,M.(1998).MarketingofIndigenousMedicinalPlantsinSouthAfrica:A
Serotoninergic Systems inOvariectomized Mice.J.BasicClin.Pathophysiol. CaseStudyinKwazulu-Natal.Rome,Italy:FoodandAgricultureOrganization
9(2),32–41.doi:10.22070/jbcp.2021.15060.1148 oftheUnitedNations
Ishaq,H.(2016).AnxiolyticandAntidepressantActivityofDifferentMethanolic Martins,J.,andS,B.(2018).PhytochemistryandPharmacologyofAnti-depressant
ExtractsofMeliaazedarachLinn.PakJ.Pharm.Sci.29(5),1649–1655. MedicinalPlants:AReview.Biomed.Pharmacother.104,343–365.doi:10.1016/
Jahani,R.,Khaledyan,D.,Jahani,A.,Jamshidi,E.,Kamalinejad,M.,Khoramjouy, j.biopha.2018.05.044
M., et al. (2019). Evaluation and Comparison of the Antidepressant-Like Mhlongo,L.S.,andVanWyk,B.E.(2019).ZuluMedicinalEthnobotany:New
Activity of Artemisia dracunculus and Stachys lavandulifolia Ethanolic RecordsfromtheAmandaweAreaofKwaZulu-Natal,SouthAfrica.SouthAfr.
Extracts: an In Vivo Study. Res. Pharm. Sci. 14 (6), 544–553. doi:10.4103/ J.Bot.122,266–290.doi:10.1016/j.sajb.2019.02.012
1735-5362.272563 Moffett,R.O.(2016).BasothoMedicinalPlants/MerianaYaDimelaTsaBasotho.
Janke,E.A.,Holroyd,K.A.,andRomanek,K.(2004).DepressionIncreasesOnset Translated by Ramotshela, L. Bloemfontein, South Africa SUN MeDIA
ofTension-typeHeadacheFollowingLaboratoryStress.Pain111(3),230–238. Bloemfontein.
doi:10.1016/j.pain.2004.06.007 Mogale,M.M.P.,VanWyk,B.-E.,andRaimondo,D.C.(2015).Ethnobotanyof
Jedi,B.,Saeid,A.M.,andMousavi,S.E.(2017).TheAntidepressant-likeEffectsof theBapedi.SouthAfr.J.Bot.98,191.doi:10.1016/j.sajb.2015.03.088
MenthaspicataEssentialOilinAnimalModelsofDepressioninMaleMice.J. Mogale,M.M.P.,Raimondo,D.C.,andVanWyk,B.-E.(2019).TheEthnobotany
FasaUniv.Med.Sci.7,141–149. ofCentralSekhukhuneland,SouthAfrica.SouthAfr.J.Bot.122,90–119.doi:10.
Kalshetty, P., Aswar, U., Bodhankar, S., Sinnathambi, A., Mohan, V., and 1016/j.sajb.2019.01.001
Thakurdesai, P. (2012). Antidepressant Effects of Standardized Extract of Moher,D.,Liberati,A.,Tetzlaff,J.,andAltman,D.G.(2009).PreferredReporting
Centella asiatica L in Olfactory Bulbectomy Model. Biomed. Aging ItemsforSystematicReviewsandMeta-Analyses:thePRISMAStatement.BMJ
Pathology2(2),48–53.doi:10.1016/j.biomag.2012.03.005 339,b2535.doi:10.1136/bmj.b2535
KeugongWado,E.,Kubicki,M.,Ngatanko,A.H.H.,LéaBlondelle,K.D.,Jorelle Moher,D.,Shamseer,L.,Clarke,M.,Ghersi,D.,Liberati,A.,Petticrew,M.,etal.
linda,D.,Roland,R.N.,etal.(2020).AnxiolyticandAntidepressantEffectsof (2015).PreferredReportingItemsforSystematicReviewandMeta-Analysis
Ziziphus mucronata Hydromethanolic Extract in Male Rats Exposed to Protocols(PRISMA-P)2015Statement.Syst.Rev.4(1),1–9.doi:10.1186/2046-
Unpredictable Chronic Mild Stress: Possible Mechanisms of Actions. J. 4053-4-1
Ethnopharmacol.260,112987.doi:10.1016/j.jep.2020.112987 Mongalo,N.I.,andMakhafola,T.J.(2018).EthnobotanicalKnowledgeoftheLay
Khan, H.,Perviz,S.,Sureda, A., Nabavi, S.M., andTejada, S.(2018). Current People of Blouberg Area (Pedi Tribe), Limpopo Province, South Africa. J.
Standing of Plant Derived Flavonoids as an Antidepressant. Food Chem. Ethnobiol.Ethnomed14,46.doi:10.1186/s13002-018-0245-4
Toxicol.119,176–188.doi:10.1016/j.fct.2018.04.052 Mosotho,N.L.,Louw,D.A.,Calitz,F.J.,andEsterhuyse,K.G.(2008).Depression
Khosravi, H., Rahnema, M., and Asle-Rousta, M. (2017). Anxiolytic and AmongSesothoSpeakersinMangaung,SouthAfrica.Afr.J.Psychiatry11(1),
Antidepressant Effects of Tarragon (Artemisia dracunculus L.) Hydro- 35–43.doi:10.4314/ajpsy.v11i1.30253
Alcoholic Extract in Male Rats Exposed to Chronic Restraint Stress. Nova Moteetee, A., Moffett, R. O., and Seleteng-Kose, L. (2019). A Review of the
BiologicaReperta4(1),1–8.doi:10.21859/acadpub.nbr.4.1.1 Ethnobotany of the Basotho of Lesotho and the Free State Province of
Koen, L., Niehaus, D., Muller, J., and Laurent, C. (2003). Use of Traditional SouthAfrica(SouthSotho).SouthAfr.J.Bot.122,21–56.doi:10.1016/j.sajb.
TreatmentMethodsinaXhosaSchizophreniaPopulation.SouthAfr.Med.J.93 2017.12.012
(433),443.doi:10.10520/EJC67965 Mothibe,M.E.,andSibanda,M.(2019).“AfricanTraditionalMedicine:South
Koenig,X.,andHilber,K.(2015).TheAnti-addictionDrugIbogaineandtheHeart: African Perspective,” in Traditional and Complementary Medicine Editor
a Delicate Relation. Molecules 20 (2), 2208–2228. doi:10.3390/ C.Mordeniz.London:IntechOpen.doi:10.5772/intechopen.83790
molecules20022208 Mumivand,H.,Babalar,M.,Tabrizi,L.,Craker,L.E.,Shokrpour,M.,andHadian,J.
Koorbanally, N.,Mulholland,D.A.,andCrouch,N.R.(2000a).Alkaloidsand (2017). Antioxidant Properties and Principal Phenolic Phytochemicals of
TriterpenoidsfromAmmochariscoranica(Amaryllidaceae).Phytochemistry54 Iranian Tarragon (Artemisia dracunculus L.) Accessions. Hortic. Environ.
(1),93–97.doi:10.1016/S0031-9422(00)00039-X Biotechnol.58,414–422.doi:10.1007/s13580-017-0121-5
Koorbanally, N., Mulholland, D. A., and Crouch, N. R. (2000b). Isolation of Mungai,K.,andBayat,A.(2019).AnOverviewofTrendsinDepressiveSymptoms
Isovanillin from Aromatic Roots of the Medicinal African Liane, Mondia in South Africa. South Afr. J. Psychol. 49 (4), 518–535. doi:10.1177/
whitei.J.Herbs,SpicesMed.Plants7(3),37–43.doi:10.1300/J044v07n03_05 0081246318823580
Koutová,D.,Maafi,N.,Havelek,R.,Blunden,L.,Rezácõová,G.,Řezáčová,M.,etal. Munir,S.,Shahid,A.,Aslam,B.,Ashfaq,U.A.,Akash,M.S.H.,Ali,M.A.,etal.
(2020).ChemicalandBiologicalAspectsofMontanine-typeAlkaloidsIsolated (2020).TheTherapeuticProspectsofNaturallyOccurringandSyntheticIndole
fromPlantsoftheAmaryllidaceaeFamily.Molecules25,1–19.doi:10.3390/ Alkaloids for Depression and Anxiety Disorders. Evid. Based Complement.
molecules25102337 Altern.Med.2020,8836983.doi:10.1155/2020/8836983
Kovatsis,A.,Flaskos,J.,Nikolaidis,E.,Kotsaki-Kovatsi,V.P.,Papaioannou,N.,and Nair,J.J.,andVanStaden,J.(2013).PharmacologicalandToxicologicalInsightsto
Tsafaris,F.(1993).ToxicityStudyoftheMainAlkaloidsofDaturaferoxin theSouthAfricanAmaryllidaceae.FoodChem.Toxicol.62,262–275.doi:10.
Broilers. Food Chem. Toxicol. 31 (11), 841–845. doi:10.1016/0278-6915(93) 1016/j.fct.2013.08.042
90222-k Nair, J. J., and Van Staden, J. (2014). Traditional Usage, Phytochemistry and
Lee,G.,andBae,H.(2017).TherapeuticEffectsofPhytochemicalsandMedicinal PharmacologyoftheSouthAfricanMedicinalPlantBoophonedisticha(L.f.)
Herbs on Depression. Biomed. Res. Int. 2017, 6596241. doi:10.1155/2017/ Herb.(Amaryllidaceae).J.Ethnopharmacol.151,12–26.doi:10.1016/j.jep.2013.
6596241 10.053
FrontiersinPharmacology|www.frontiersin.org 36 June2022|Volume13|Article895286

## Page 37

Bonokwaneetal. SouthAfricanAntidepressantPlants
Nair,J.J.,Bastida,J.,Codina,C.,Viladomat,F.,andvanStaden,J.(2013).Alkaloids perforatumMedicinalPlants.IndustrialCropsProd.82,29–36.doi:10.1016/
oftheSouth African Amaryllidaceae: aReview. Nat.Prod.Commun. 8(9), j.indcrop.2015.12.014
1335–1350.doi:10.1177/1934578x1300800938 Ressler,K.J.,andNemeroff,C.B.(2000).RoleofSerotonergicandNoradrenergic
Ndhlala,A.R.,Stafford,G.I.,Finnie,J.F.,andVanStaden,J.(2011).Commercial SystemsinthePathophysiologyofDepressionandAnxietyDisorders.Depress
Herbal Preparations in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa: The Urban Face of Anxiety 12, 2–19. doi:10.1002/1520-6394(2000)12:1+<2::AID-DA2>3.0.CO;
Traditional Medicine. South Afr. J. Bot. 77 (4), 830–843. doi:10.1016/j.sajb. 2-4
2011.09.002 Rivera,D.,Allkin,R.,Obón,C.,Alcaraz,F.,Verpoorte,R.,andHeinrich,M.(2014).
Ndhlala,A.R.,Ncube,B.,Okem,A.,Mulaudzi,R.B.,andVanStaden,J.(2013). WhatIsinaName?theNeedforAccurateScientificNomenclatureforPlants.J.
Toxicology of Some Important Medicinal Plants in Southern Africa. Food Ethnopharmacol.152(393-402),393–402.doi:10.1016/j.jep.2013.12.022
Chem.Toxicol.62,609–621.doi:10.1016/j.fct.2013.09.027 Robertson,B.(2006).DoestheEvidenceSupportCollaborationbetweenPsychiatry
Neergaard,J.S.,Andersen,J.,Pedersen,M.E.,Stafford,G.I.,Staden,J.V.,and andTraditionalHealers?FindingsfromThreeSouthAfricanStudies.Afr.J.
Jäger, A. K. (2009). Alkaloids from Boophone disticha with Affinity to the Psych.9,87–90.doi:10.4314/ajpsy.v9i2.30210
SerotoninTransporter.SouthAfr.J.Bot.75(2),371–374.doi:10.1016/j.sajb. Rolnik,A.,andOlas,B.(2021).ThePlantsoftheAsteraceaeFamilyasAgentsinthe
2009.02.173 Protection of Human Health. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 22, 3009. doi:10.3390/
Neergaard,J.S.,Rasmussen,H.B.,Stafford,G.I.,VanStaden,J.,andJäger,A.K. ijms22063009
(2010).SerotoninTransporterAffinityof(−)-loliolide,aMonoterpeneLactone Saki, K., Bahmani, M., and Rafieian-Kopaei, M. (2014). The Effect of Most
fromMondiawhitei.SouthAfr.J.Bot.76(3),593–596.doi:10.1016/j.sajb.2010. Important Medicinal Plants on Two Importnt Psychiatric Disorders
02.091 (AnxietyandDepression)-AReview.AsianPacJ.Trop.Med.7S1,S34–S42.
Nglazi,M.D.,Joubert,J.D.,Stein,D.J.,Lund,C.,Wiysonge,C.S.,Vos,T.,etal. doi:10.1016/S1995-7645(14)60201-7
(2016). Epidemiology of Major Depressive Disorder in South Africa (1997- Sales, A. J., Crestani, C. C., Guimarães, F. S., and Joca, S. R. L. (2018).
2015):ASystematicReviewProtocol.BMJOpen6(7),e011749.doi:10.1136/ Antidepressant-like Effect Induced by Cannabidiol is Dependent on Brain
bmjopen-2016-011749 SerotoninLevels.Prog.Neuropsychopharmacol.Biol.Psychiatry86,255–261.
Nielsen,N.D.,Sandager,M.,Stafford,G.I.,vanStaden,J.,andJäger,A.K.(2004). doi:10.1016/j.pnpbp.2018.06.002
ScreeningofIndigenousPlantsfromSouthAfricaforAffinitytotheSerotonin Sandager,M.,Nielsen,N.D.,Stafford,G.I.,vanStaden,J.,andJäger,A.K.(2005).
ReuptakeTransportProtein.J.Ethnopharmacol.94(1),159–163.doi:10.1016/j. AlkaloidsfromBoophanedistichawithAffinitytotheSerotoninTransporterin
jep.2004.05.013 RatBrain.J.Ethnopharmacol.98(3),367–370.doi:10.1016/j.jep.2005.01.037
Nortje,J.M.,andvanWyk,B.E.(2015).MedicinalPlantsoftheKamiesberg, Sarker,S.D.,Laird,A.,Nahar,L.,Kumarasamy,Y.,andJaspars,M.(2001).Indole
Namaqualand,SouthAfrica.J.Ethnopharmacol.171,205–222.doi:10.1016/j. AlkaloidsfromtheSeedsofCentaureacyanus(Asteraceae).Phytochemistry57
jep.2015.04.049 (8),1273–1276.doi:10.1016/S0031-9422(01)00084-X
Öztürk,Y.,Aydin,S.,Beis,R.,Başer,K.H.C.,andBerberoĝlu,H.(1996).Effectsof Sarris,J.,Panossian,A.,Schweitzer,I.,Stough,C.,andScholey,A.(2011).Herbal
HypericumperforatumL.andHypericumcalycinumL.ExtractsontheCentral Medicine for Depression, Anxiety and Insomnia: A Review of
Nervous SysteminMice.Phytomedicine 3(2),139–146.doi:10.1016/S0944- PsychopharmacologyandClinicalEvidence.Eur.Neuropsychopharmacol.21
7113(96)80027-4 (12),841–860.doi:10.1016/j.euroneuro.2011.04.002
Panda, S. K., and Luyten, W. (2018). Antiparasitic Activity in Asteraceae with Sasaki, K., El Omri, A., Kondo, S., Han, J., and Isoda, H. (2013). Rosmarinus
SpecialAttentiontoEthnobotanicalUsebytheTribesofOdisha,India.Parasite officinalis Polyphenols Produce Anti-Depressant-Like Effect through
25(10),10.doi:10.1051/parasite/2018008 Monoaminergic and Cholinergic Functions Modulation. Behav. Brain Res.
Pedersen,M.E,Weng,A.,Sert,A.,Stafford,G.,vanStaden,J.,Nielsen,M.,etal. 238,86–94.doi:10.1016/j.bbr.2012.10.010
(2006). Pharmacological Studies on Xysmalobium undulatum and Mondia Sasaki, K., Ferdousi, F., Fukumitsu, S., Kuwata, H., and Isoda, H. (2021).
whitei-TwoSouthAfricanPlantswithInVitroSSRIActivity.PlantaMed. Antidepressant- and Anxiolytic-like Activities of Rosmarinus officinalis
72,123.doi:10.1055/s-2006-949923 Extract in Rodent Models: Involvement of Oxytocinergic System. Biomed.
Pedersen,M.E.,Szewczyk,B.,Stachowicz,K.,Wieronska,J.,Andersen,J.,Stafford, Pharmacother.144,112291.doi:10.1016/j.biopha.2021.112291
G.I.,etal.(2008).EffectsofSouthAfricanTraditionalMedicineinAnimal Schildkraut,J.J.(1965).TheCatecholamineHypothesisofAffectiveDisorders:a
ModelsforDepression.J.Ethnopharmacol.119(3),542–548.doi:10.1016/j.jep. ReviewofSupporting Evidence. Am.J.Psychiatry 122(5),509–522.doi:10.
2008.08.030 1176/ajp.122.5.509
Perveen,T.,Hashmi,B.M.,Haider,S.,Tabassum,S.,Saleem,S.,andSiddiqui,M.A. Selvi,P.T.,Kumar,M.S.,Rajesh,R.,andKathiravan,T.(2012).Antidepressant
(2013).RoleofMonoaminergicSystemintheEtiologyofOliveOilInduced ActivityofEthanolicExtractofLeavesofCentellaasiatica.LinnbyInVivo
AntidepressantandAnxiolyticEffectsinRats.ISRNPharmacol.2013,615685. Methods.AsianJ.Res.Pharm.Sci.2(2),76–79.
doi:10.1155/2013/615685 Sobiecki,J.F.(2002).APreliminaryInventoryofPlantsUsedforPsychoactive
Philander,L.A.(2011).AnEthnobotanyofWesternCapeRastaBushMedicine.J. PurposesinSouthernAfricanHealingTraditions.Trans.R.Soc.S.Afr.57(1-2),
Ethnopharmacol.138(2),578–594.doi:10.1016/j.jep.2011.10.004 1–24.doi:10.1080/00359190209520523
Popa-Velea,O.,Gheorghe,I.R.,Truţescu,C.I.,andPurcărea,V.L.(2015).Current Sorsdahl,K.,Stein,D.J.,Grimsrud,A.,Seedat,S.,Flisher,A.J.,Williams,D.R.,
Challenges and Pitfalls in the Pharmacological Treatment of Depression. J. et al. (2009). Traditional Healers in the Treatment of Common Mental
Med.Life8(2),181–186. DisordersinSouthAfrica.J.Nerv.Ment.Dis.197(6),434–441.doi:10.1097/
Rabadia,J.,Satish,S.,andRamanjaneyulu,J.(2013).AnInvestigationofAnti- NMD.0b013e3181a61dbc
depressant Activity of Cinnamomum camphora Oil in Experimental Mice. Stafford,G.I.,Pedersen,M.E.,vanStaden,J.,andJäger,A.K.(2008).ReviewonPlants
AsianJ.Biomed.Pharm.Sci.3(20),44–48. with CNS-Effects Used in Traditional South African Medicine against Mental
Rabiei, Z., and Setorki, M. (2019). Effect of Ethanol Adiantum capillus-veneris Diseases.J.Ethnopharmacol.119(3),513–537.doi:10.1016/j.jep.2008.08.010
ExtractinExperimentalModelsofAnxietyandDepression.Braz.J.Pharm.Sci. Stafford,G.I.,Birer,C.,Brodin,B.,Christensen,S.B.,Eriksson,A.H.,Jäger,A.K.,
55,9.doi:10.1590/s2175-97902019000118099 etal.(2013).SerotoninTransporterProtein(SERT)andP-Glycoprotein(P-Gp)
Raffauf,R.F.,andFlagler,M.B.(1960).AlkaloidsoftheApocynaceae.Econ.Bot.14 Binding Activity of Montanine and Coccinine from Three Species of
(1),37–55.doi:10.1007/BF02859365 Haemanthus L. (Amaryllidaceae). South Afr. J. Bot. 88, 101–106. doi:10.
Raghoo,M.,Crouch,N.R.,andKoorbanally,N.A.(2021).ANovelandUnusual 1016/j.sajb.2013.06.002
Tetramethoxylated Crinine Alkaloid from Ammocharis coranica Stafford, G. I. (2009). Southern African Plants Used to Treat Central Nervous
(Amaryllidaceae). South Afr. J. Bot. 137, 451–454. doi:10.1016/j.sajb.2020. System Related Disorders. Doctoral thesis, Pietermaritzburg, South Africa:
11.012 UniversityofKwaZulu-Natal.
Ramalhete,N.,Machado,A.,Serrano,R.,Gomes,E.T.,Mota-Filipe,H.,andSilva, Starkowitz,M.(2013).AfricanTraditionalHealers’UnderstandingofDepressionas
O.(2016).ComparativeStudyontheInVivoAntidepressantActivitiesofthe aMentalIllness:ImplicationsforSocialWorkPractice.Pretoria:Universityof
Portuguese Hypericum foliosum, Hypericum androsaemum and Hypericum Pretoria.(Mini-dissertation).
FrontiersinPharmacology|www.frontiersin.org 37 June2022|Volume13|Article895286

## Page 38

Bonokwaneetal. SouthAfricanAntidepressantPlants
Staub, P. O., Geck, M. S., Weckerle, C. S., Casu, L., and Leonti, M. (2015). Viljoen,A.,Sandasi,M.,andVermaak,I.(2019).TheRoleoftheSouthAfrican
Classifying Diseases and Remedies in Ethnomedicine and Journal of Botany as a Vehicle to Promote Medicinal Plant Research- A
Ethnopharmacology. J. Ethnopharmacol. 174, 514–519. doi:10.1016/j.jep. Bibliometric Appraisal. South Afr. J. Bot. 122, 3–10. doi:10.1016/j.sajb.2018.
2015.08.051 07.024
Sülsen,V.P.,Lizarraga,E.,Mamadalieva,N.Z.,andLago,J.H.G.(2017).Potential Weckerle,C.S.,deBoer,H.J.,Puri,R.K.,vanAndel,T.,Bussmann,R.W.,and
of Terpenoids and Flavonoids from Asteraceae as Anti-inflammatory, Leonti, M. (2018). Recommended Standards for Conducting and Reporting
Antitumor,andAntiparasiticAgents.Evid.BasedComplement.Altern.Med. EthnopharmacologicalFieldStudies.J.Ethnopharmacol.210,125–132.doi:10.
2017,6196198.doi:10.1155/2017/6196198 1016/j.jep.2017.08.018
Tariq,U.,Butt,M.S.,Pasha,I.,andFaisal,M.N.(2021).NeuroprotectiveEffectsof Wei,C.B.,Jia,J.P.,Wang,F.,Zhou,A.H.,andZuo,X.M.(2016).Overlapbetween
OleaeuropaeaL.FruitExtractagainstCigaretteSmoke-InducedDepressive- Headache,Depression,andAnxietyinGeneralNeurologicalClinics:ACross-
Like Behaviors in Sprague-Dawley Rats. J. Food Biochem. 45 (12), e14014. Sectional Study. Chin. Med. J. 129 (12), 1394–1399. doi:10.4103/0366-6999.
doi:10.1111/jfbc.14014 183410
Thring,T.S.,andWeitz,F.M.(2006).MedicinalPlantUseintheBredasdorp/Elim Wink, M., and Roberts, M. W. (1998). Alkaloids: Biochemistry, Ecology, and
RegionoftheSouthernOverbergintheWesternCapeProvinceofSouthAfrica. MedicinalApplication.NewYork:PlenumPress.
J.Ethnopharmacol.103,261–275.doi:10.1016/j.jep.2005.08.013 WorldHealthOrganisation(2017).DepressionandOtherCommonMentalDisorders:
Tian,J.,Zhang,F.,Cheng,J.,Guo,S.,Liu,P.,andWang,H.(2014).Antidepressant- GlobalHealthEstimates.Geneva,Switzerland:WorldHealthOrganization
likeActivityofAdhyperforin,aNovelConstituentofHypericumperforatumL. Zanelate,T.V.,Biojone,C.,Moreira,F.A.,Guimarães,F.S.,andJoca,S.R.L.
Sci.Rep.4(5632),5632.doi:10.1038/srep05632 (2010).Antidepressant-likeEffectsofCannabidiolinMice:PossibleInvolment
Todd,C.,Patel,V.,Simunyu,E.,Gwanzura,F.,Acuda,W.,Winston,M.,etal. of5-HT Receptors.Br.J.Pharmacol.159(1),122–128.doi:10.1111/j.1476-
1A
(1999).TheOnsetofCommonMentalDisordersinPrimaryCareAttendersin 5381.2009.00521.x
Harare,Zimbabwe.Psychol.Med.29,97–104.doi:10.1017/s0033291798007661
Trease,G.E.,andEvans,W.C.(1983).TextbookofPharmacognosy12thedition, Author Disclaimer: Opinions, findings and conclusions or recommendations
TindallandCo,LondonUK. expressedinthispublicationarethoseoftheauthors,andnotoftheNRF.
Trigo, J. R., Leal, I. R., Matzenbacher, N. I., and Lewinsohn, T. M. (2003).
Chemotaxonomic Value of Pyrrolizidine Alkaloids in Southern Brazil ConflictofInterest:Theauthorsdeclarethattheresearchwasconductedinthe
Senecio (Senecioneae: Asteraceae). Biochem. Syst. Ecol. 31 (9), 1011–1022. absenceofanycommercialorfinancialrelationshipsthatcouldbeconstruedasa
doi:10.1016/S0305-1978(03)00038-3 potentialconflictofinterest.
VanWyk,B.E.,andGericke,N.(2000).People’sPlants:ARevisedVersion.Pretoria:
SouthAfricaBrizaPublication. Publisher’sNote:Allclaimsexpressedinthisarticlearesolelythoseoftheauthors
VanWyk,B.E.,vanOudtshoorn,B.,andGericke,N.(1997).MedicinalPlantsOf anddonotnecessarilyrepresentthoseoftheiraffiliatedorganizations,orthoseof
SouthAfricaPretoria.SouthAfricaBrizaPublications. thepublisher,theeditorsandthereviewers.Anyproductthatmaybeevaluatedin
VanWyk,B.-E.,deWet,H.,andVanHeerden,F.R.(2008).AnEthnobotanical thisarticle,orclaimthatmaybemadebyitsmanufacturer,isnotguaranteedor
SurveyofMedicinalPlantsintheSoutheasternKaroo,SouthAfrica.SouthAfr. endorsedbythepublisher.
J.Bot.74(4),696–704.doi:10.1016/j.sajb.2008.05.001
Venter,F.,andVenter,J.-A.(2016).MakingtheMostofIndigenousTrees.3rdVol. Copyright©2022Bonokwane,Lekhooa,StruwigandAremu.Thisisanopen-access
Pretoria,SouthAfrica:BrizaPublications. articledistributedunderthetermsoftheCreativeCommonsAttributionLicense(CCBY).
Victoria, F. N., Anversa, R., Penteado, F., Castro, M., Lenardão, E. J., and Theuse,distributionorreproductioninotherforumsispermitted,providedtheoriginal
Savegnago, L. (2014). Antioxidant and Antidepressant-like Activities of author(s)andthecopyrightowner(s)arecreditedandthattheoriginalpublicationinthis
Semi-synthetic α-phenylseleno Citronellal. Eur. J. Pharmacol.742, 131–138. journaliscited,inaccordancewithacceptedacademicpractice.Nouse,distributionor
doi:10.1016/j.ejphar.2014.09.005 reproductionispermittedwhichdoesnotcomplywiththeseterms.
FrontiersinPharmacology|www.frontiersin.org 38 June2022|Volume13|Article895286

