## Page 1

"~" Journal of
~ ETHNO
PHARMACOLOGY
E L S E V I E R Journal of Ethnopharmacology 50 (1996) 141-146
Some ethnopharmacological notes on African hallucinogens
P.A.G.M. De Smet
Drug Information Center, Royal Dutch Association for the Advancement of Pharmacy, Alexanderstraat 11, 2514 JL The Hague,
The Netherlands
Received 21 November 1994; accepted 16 August 1995
Abstract
This paper provides a short overview of ritual African hallucinogens. In addition to examples already listed by
Schultes and Hofmann in their classic text books, Boophane distieha, Alehornea floribunda, Monadenium lugardae,
Mostuea spp. and Voacanga bracteata are identified as African botanicals with proven or alleged hallucinogenic po-
tential.
Keywords: Botanicals; Hallucinogens; Africa
I. Introduction periences by means of hallucinogenic plants than
many peoples of the Old World (La Barre 1970).
The aboriginal use of botanical hallucinogens However, these proportions between American
has been nowhere more extensive and varied than and African hallucinogens may also reflect to
in the Americas. This is well underscored by the some extent that Professor Schultes and his
book 'Pflanzen der G6tter' which was compiled by followers at Harvard University did most of their
two eminent experts in this field, Schultes and ethnobotanical field work on the American side of
Hofmann (1980a). Of 91 reviewed plants with pro- the Atlantic Ocean. It would therefore be
ven or alleged hallucinogenic potential, two-thirds understandable if their publications would provide
have been applied only or mainly in the Western the most comprehensive coverage for this part of
Hemisphere, and 8 of the world's 14 major the world. As a result, the ethnobotany of African
hallucinogens are completely rooted in Amerin- hallucinogens could be more varied than has been
dian tradition. These figures contrast sharply with assumed so far.
the listing of just one established hallucinogen and
four possible hallucinogens that have been used 2. Boophane d/st/cha
exclusively on the African continent (Table 1). A
major reason for this difference may well be that One African plant which should definitely be
American Indians retained the fundamental recognized as a hallucinogen is Boophane disticha
shamanism characteristic of hunting societies and (L.f.) Herb. (Amaryllidaceae). Although its bulb is
thus more actively sought mystic visionary ex- usually portrayed as a means of suicide, arrow
0378-8741/96/$15.00 © 1996 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd. All fights reserved
SSDI 0378-8741(95)01337-D

## Page 2

142 P.A.G.M. De Smet / Journal of Ethnopharmacology 50 (1996) 141-146
Table ! Table 1 (continued)
The ritual African botanicals with proven or alleged
hallucinogenic potential listed by Schultes and Hofmann
According to a Russian report, trispheridine, tacettin, hip-
(1980a and 1980b)
peastrine, pancratin, galanthamine, lycorine, hordenine, and
Established ImHucinogens two unidentified bases were isolated from the bulbs with roots.
Unfortunately, no quantitative information about the individu-
al levels of these alkaloids was provided (Munvime and Murav-
Cannabis sativa L. (Cannabaceae)
jova, 1973). The bulb of a related species, P.maritimum, yields
Ubiquitous plant with well-known psychoactive properties.
lycorine as major alkaloid (Vazquez Tato et al., 1988; Sener et
Datura species (Solanaceae) al., 1993). Of the alkaloids found in P. trianthum, galanthamine
has been studied most intensively in humans, because its
Ubiquitous plants with well-known deliriant alkaloids.
anticholinesterase activity might make it a potentially useful
Tabernanthe iboga Balllon (Apocynaceae) drug in patients with Alzheimer's disease. In one study, patients
tolerated 5 or 10 mg doses given three times daily, whereas 15
The root of this shrub contains the indole alkaloid ibogaine
mg three times daily resulted in central agitation and
as its major principle. This alkaloid basically acts as a potent
sleeplessness (Thomsen et al. 1990).
central stimulant. Published experimental evidence for its
hallucinogenic potential in man seems to be limited to a single
observation (cf. Pope Jr. 1969).
Possible hallucinogens
poison and traditional medicine (Watt and Breyer-
Cymbopogon densiflorus Stapf (Gramineae)
Brandwijk, 1962), it is also capable of producing
According to a herbarium annotation, the flowers cause profound hallucinations.
foretelling dreams when smoked alone or with tobacco by Laydevant (1932) described its use in initiation
Tanganyikan witch doctors.
ceremonies of the South African Basuto. At the
Among the constituents of the essential oil in the flowers are
commencement of the initiation period, Basuto
limonene, cineole, and diosphenol (Da Cunha 1972), as well as
ocimene and dihydrotagetone (Koketsu et al. 1976). boys were given food mixed with the bulb and
other ingredients. They were taught that such a
Helichrysum species (Asteraceae) remedy would imbue them with the qualities of
According to herbarium annotations, H. foetidum and H.
their ancestors and that it would tend to make men
stenopterum are used by Zulu witch doctors for inhaling to get
of them. The signs of intoxication were regarded as
their trance.
The aerial parts of H. stenopterum contain various phloro- a token that the spirit of manhood had entered
glucinol derivatives (Jakupovic et al. 1986). their bodies.
Early investigations in the beginning of this cen-
Mesembryanthemum species (Aizoaceae)
tury demonstrated that the bulb of Boophane
The Hottentots of southern Africa once chewed and smoked
disticha contains alkaloids with similar bioactivity
a plant called kanna or channa for enjoyment and stimulation.
In the present time, such names refer to certain species of as Datura alkaloids (Lewin 1912; Tutin 1912).
Mesembryanthemum, especially M. expansum and M. tortuosum Later research by Hauth and Stauffacher (1961)
(syn. Sceletium expansum and S. tortuosum), but there is no showed that eleven different alkaloids are present,
direct and indisputable evidence that this is a correct idenflca- with a total yield of 0.31% from the fresh bulb.
tion of the ancient Hottentot drug.
Buphanidrine, undulatine, buphanisine, buphan-
Mesembryanthemum species contain the alkaloids, mesem-
brine and mesembrenine, but there are no convincing data that amine and nerbowdine emerged as major alkaloids
these alkaloids have hallucinogenic properties. In one (Table 2). The hallucinogenic efficacy of Boophane
volunteer, an oral dose of 150 mg of mesembrine only produced disticha was documented by Laing (1979), who
headache, listlessness and loss of appetite (Hartwich and
reported on three young men presenting at a
Zwicky 1914; Bodendorf and Krieger 1957; Bodendorf and
Zimbabwean hospital the morning after they had
Kloss 1961; Popelak et al. 1960a; Popelak et al. 1960b; Tyler Jr
1966). taken the bulb. One of them was deeply un-
conscious, and had dilated pupils, tachycardia,
raised blood pressure, a slightly raised temperature
Pancratium trianthum Herb. (Amaryllidaceae)
and labored respiration. He remained in this state
Bushmen in Botswana are claimed to induce visual hallucina-
for 24 h and could be discharged after 72 h with
tions by rubbing the bulb on an incision made on the head.

## Page 3

P.A.G.M. De Smet /Journal of Ethnopharmacology 50 (1996) 141-146 143
Table 2 species only emerges from publications in the
Alkaloids in the bulb of Boophaned isticha (L.F.) Herb. (Hauth French language.
and Stauffacher 1961)
Alkaloid Relative contribution to 3. Other plants
total alkaloids
Alchornea floribunda Miill. Arg. (Euphorbiaceae)
Buphanidrine 19.4%
Undulatine 18.6%
Buphanisine 16.9% In Zaire, Alchorneafloribunda has a long history
Buphanamine 14.1% of use under the name niando as an aphrodisiac
Nerbowdine 1I . 1% and for its stimulant and intoxicating properties
Crinine 7.2%
(De Wildeman 1920; Raymond-Hamet 1952a).
Distichamine 5.4%
Crinamidine !.2% The plant is also valued by the Fang of Gabon for
Acetylnerbowdine 0.6% its narcotic properties (Fernandez 1972).
Lycorine 0.4% At one time, the aphrodisiac action was at-
Buphacetine 0.3% tributed to the presence of yohimbine, but a later
evaluation demonstrated that this alkaloid is ab-
sent in the bark of Alchornea floribunda
(Raymond-Hamet and Goutarel 1965). Subse-
a normal pulse, blood pressure and temperature. quently, Khuong-Huu et al. (1970) isolated the
Another youngster appeared to suffer from an alkaloid, alchorneine, from the leaf, stem bark and
acute psychotic episode with violent hallucina- root of Alchornea floribunda and from the leaf of
tions. His physical signs were similar to those in Alchornea hirtella. Khuong-Huu et al. (1972) anal-
the first victim but less marked. He was treated ysed different dried plant parts of Alchornea
with intravenous chlorpromazine to sedate him floribunda and reported crude alkaloid levels of
and after 36 h he had recovered. The third young 0.13 mg/g (stem bark), 1.86 mg/g (root bark) and
man, who was not admitted, claimed that he had 4.83 mg/g (leaf). Alchorneine was the major alka-
taken the decoction with the other two. He had loid of the stem bark and the root bark, and the
spent the night feeling drunk and seeing visions root bark also contained isoalchorneine. This lat-
and felt perfectly well the following morning. On ter alkaloid was also found in the leaf, together
examination, the only abnormal sign was slightly with alchorneinone. The dried stem bark of
dilated pupils. After recovery, all three men claim- Alchornea hirtella yielded 0.16 mg/g of crude alka-
ed that the hallucinatory effect of the bulb was loids with alchorneine as the major component.
well known in their area (the Gutu district). The imidazo structures of these alkaloids were
Botanical analysis of stomach contents and rem- elucidated.
nants of the actual bulbs confirmed that they had Raymond-Hamet (1952b) discovered that a
ingested Boophane disticha. decoction of the powdered root enhances the sen-
Other detailed reports about the intentional sitivity of the sympathic nervous system for
ingestion of Boophane disticha for hallucinatory epinephrine in the anaesthesized dog, and
purposes have not been found in the literature, but Khuong-Huu et al. (1970) characterized alchor-
there are ethnopharmacological statements that neine as a parasympathic ganglioplegic agent
the bulb is traditionally employed in Zimbabwe to because of its intense vagolytic action and strong
arouse ancestral spirits (Nyazema 1984; Gelfand et inhibition of intestinal peristalsis in the
al. 1985). anaesthesized dog. However, the reputed central
Besides Boophane disticha, the African flora stimulatory properties still have to be established.
comprises various plants which are reputed to
have hallucinogenic activity. Some poignant ex- Monadenium lugardae N.E.Br. (Euphorbiaceae)
amples are reviewed below. While most of these
examples have already been mentioned somewhere This plant has widely been used as a medicine in
in the Anglo-Saxon literature, the use of Mostuea the Piet Rief area of the Eastern Transvaal. Taken

## Page 4

144 P.A.G.M. De Smet / Journal of Ethnopharmacology 50 (1996) 141-146
in sufficient quantities, the root is believed to pro- var. brunonis; the leaves of this latter species yield-
duce hallucinations and delirium. The local ed 0.08% of alkaloids. Onanga and Khuong-Huu
diviners sometimes swallowed a piece of the root, (1980) also examined different parts of Mostuea
which was supposed to make them see visions and brunonis var. brunonis and found sempervirine in
to prophesy under its influence (Watt and Breyer- the roots and gelsemicine, 14-hydroxy-gelsemicine,
Brandwijk 1962; Watt 1967). 20(N-4)-dehydrogelsemicine and mostueine in the
The plant contains potentially bioactive com- leaves and stems.
pounds, such as alkaloids (Gundidza 1985), but The only chemical and pharmacological evalu-
the reputed hallucinogenic properties have not yet ation of Mostuea stimulans A. Chev. was reported
been verified. It has merely been reported that the by Paris and Moyse-Mignon (1949). They found
latex from aerial parts and a methanolic extract 0.06% of alkaloids in the stalks with leaves, 0.15%
from the fresh stems had a dualistic effect on in the entire roots, and 0.33% in the root bark. One
guinea-pig ileum: contractile activity at lower con- root bark alkaloid showed similarities to semper-
centrations and the opposite effect at higher con- virine, while another root bark alkaloid had cer-
centrations (Gundidza 1990; 1991). The latex also tain properties similar to gelsemine; in neither
showed significant insecticidal activity (Gundidza case, a definitive identification was made. Sub-
1986). cutaneously administered root bark had a mean
lethal dose around 0.25 g/kg in the mouse. Death
Mostuea species (Loganiaceae) was preceded by a phase of hyperexcitability; the
animals got up on their hind legs and sometimes
Chevalier (1946;1947) reported on the authority presented with convulsions. In anaesthetized dogs,
of the Reverend Father Walker that Gabonese an intravenous dose of 0.05 to 0.10 g/kg produced
natives in the region of Fernan-Vaz used the hypotension followed by hypertension, whereas a
grated chunks of a certain root as aphrodisiac. higher dose of 0.10 to 0.20 g/kg only produced
Among the vernacular names of the drug were hypotension; a short phase of tachyardia and
Sata mbwanda (Nkomi) and Sdtd mbwundb hyperpnoea was succeeded by cardiac and respira-
(Bakole). Chevalier identified the already known tory depression.
Mostuea gabonica Baillon and a new species, Since Mostuea stimulans might contain semper-
Mostuea stimulans, as source plants. According to virine and gelsemine, the occurrence of gelsemine
Walker, the natives considered the roots as a and related alkaloids in Gelsemium sempervirens
potent aphrodisiac and claimed that it had an could be of interest. Poisoning with this latter
action comparable to that of Tabernanthe iboga. plant can result in headache, dizziness, visual dis-
During nights consecrated to drumming and danc- turbances and a dry mouth, with muscular
ing, they would chew the roots and gratings to weakness and signs of a weak strychnine-like
dispel sleep, but more often the roots were con- action in severe cases (Blaw et al. 1979; Lampe and
surned, alone or mixed with iboga, because of the McCann 1985), but truely hallucinogenic reactions
sexual excitation they provoked. Exaggerated use have not been reported. There is a 19th century
of the drug could lead to cerebral troubles. source, however, which claims that Gelsemium use
According to Chevalier, the chewed or powdered may result in narcotic-like habituation (Lewin
root bark first tasted very bitter when put into the 1962).
mouth, and then induced salivation and acquired
a taste reminiscent of a fresh kola nut. It produced Voacanga bracteata (Apocynaceae)
a certain euphoria and, if the dose was a bit strong,
a sort of intoxication was experienced. According to an annotation on a herbarium
The occurrence of alkaloids in the genus of specimen, the bark of Voacanga bracteata is said to
Mostuea is well established. Bouquet and Fournet be used in Gabon to become 'high' (Bisset 1985a).
(1975) isolated 0.2% from roots of Mostuea hirsuta The stem bark of this plant contains 2.46% of alka-
and also found 0.2% in roots of Mostuea brunonis loids, such as voacamine/voacamine N-oxide

## Page 5

P.A.G.M. De Smet / Journal of Ethnopharmacology 50 (1996) 141-146 145
(0.22%), 20-epi-voacorine (0.15%), and voacangine Gundidza, M. (1990) Action of Monadenium lugardiae latex on
(0.09%) (Puisieux et al. 1965; Bisset 1985b). Al- guinea-pig ileum. Fitoterapia 61,442-444.
Gundidza, M. (1991) Effect of methanol extract from
though these alkaloids are chemically related to
Monadenium lugardiae on contractile activity of guinea-pig
ibogaine, there is no evidence that they are
ileum. Central African Journal of Medicine 37, 141-144.
hallucinogenic. In animal experiments, voacamine, Hartwich, C. and Zwicky, E. (1914) Ober Channa, ein
voacorine and voacangine have shown, besides Genussmittel der Hottentotten. Apotheker-Zeitung 29,
other activities such as cardiovascular effects, a 925-926, 937-939, 949-950 and 961-962.
Hauth, H. and Stauffacher, D. (1961) Die Alkaloide von
depressant action on the central nervous system
Buphane disticha (L.f.) Herb. Helvetica Chimica Acta 44,
(Blanpin et al. 1961; Quevauviller and Blanpin
491-502.
1957a; 1957b). Jakupovic, J., Kuhnke, J., Schuster, A., Metwally, M.A. and
Bohlmann, F. (1986) Phloroglucinol derivatives and other
References constituents from South African Helichrysum species.
Phytochemistry 25, 1133-1142.
Khuong-Huu, F., Leforestier, J.-P., Maillard, G. and Goutarel,
Bisset, N.G. (1985a) Uses of Voacanga species. Agricultural
R. (1970) L'alchorn6ine, alcaloi'de d6riv6 de la t6trahydro-
University Wageningen Papers 85, no.3, 115-122.
imidazo-l.2a pyrimidine, isoi6 de deux Euphorbiac~es
Bisset, N.G. (1985b) Phytochemistry and pharmacology of africaines, rAlchorneafloribunda Muell. Arg. et I'Alchornea
Voacanga species. Agricultural University Wageningen hirtella Benth. Comptes Rendus de l'Academie des Sciences
Papers 85, no.3, 81-114.
Paris S~rie C, 2070-2072.
Blanpin, O., Quevauviller, A. and Pontus, C. (1961) Sur la
Khuong-Huu, F., Le Forestier, J.-P. and Goutarel, R. (1972)
voacangine, alcaloide du Voacanga africana Stapf Alchorn6ine, isoalchorn6ine et alchorn6inone, produits
Apocynac~s. Th~rapie 16, 941-945. isol6s de l'Alchorneafloribanda Muell. Arg. Tetrahedron 28,
Blaw, M.E., Adkisson, M.A., Levin, D., Garriott, J.C. and Tin-
5207-5220.
dail, R.S.A. (1979) Poisoning with Carolina jessamine
Koketsu, M., Moura, L.L. and Magalhaes, M.T. (1976) Essen-
(Gelsemium sempervirens). Journal of Pediatrics 94, tial oils of Cymbopogon densiflorus Stapf and Tagetes
998-1001. minuta L. grown in Brazil. Anais da Academia Brasileira de
Bodendorf, K, and Kloss, P. (1961) Ober Abbau und Biogenese
Ciencias 48, 743-746.
der Alkaloide Mesembrin und Mesembrenin. Archiv der
La Barre, W. (1970) Old and New World narcotics: a statistical
Pharmazie 66, 654-661. question and an ethnological reply. Economic Botany 24,
Bodendorf, K. and Krieger, W. (1957) l~ber die Alkaloide yon 73-80.
Mesembryanthemum tortuosum L. Archiv der Pharmazie
Laing, R.O. (1979) Three cases of poisoning by Boophane
62, 441-448.
disticha. Central African Journal of Medicine 25, 265-266.
Chevalier, A. (1946) Le Sam mbwanda racine stimulante et Lampe, K.F. and McCann, M.A. (1985) AMA Handbook of
aphrodisiaque employ6e par les Noirs du Gabon et son Poisonous and Injurious Plants. American Medical Associa-
identification botanique. Comptes Rendus de l'Academie des
tion, Chicago, pp. 84-85.
Sciences 223, 767-769.
Laydevant, F. (1932) Religion or sacred plants of Basutoland.
Chevalier, A. (1947) Les Mostuea africains et leurs propri~t6s Bantu Studies 6, 65-66 (cited in: H. Schleiffer (Ed.), (1979)
stimulantes. Revue de Botanique Appliqu~e 27, 104-109. Narcotic plants of the Old World used in rituals and everyday
Da Cunha, A.P.M.A. (1972) Estudo quimico e cromatogr~fico
life. Lubrecht & Cramer, Monticello).
do 6leo essential de Cymbopogon densiflorus (Stend.) Stapf,
Lewin, L. (1912) Untersuchungen ~ber Buphane disticha
de Angola. Anais da Academia Brasileira de Ciencias 44,
(Haemanthus toxicarius). Archly J~r Experimentelle
Suppl. 285-288. Pathologie und Pharmakologie 68, 333-340.
De Wildeman, E. (1920) Le "Niando" succ~dan6 du chanvre au
Lewin, L. (1962) Gifte and Vergiftungen. Lehrbuch der Tox-
Congo beige. Congo 1,534-538.
ikologie. Fiinfte unver/inderte Ausgabe. Karl F. Haug
Fernandez, J.W. (1972) Tabernanthe iboga: narcotic ecstasis
Verlag, UIm/Donau, pp. 788-789.
and the work of the ancestors. In: P.T. Furst (Ed.), Flesh of
Munvime, F.D. and Muravjova, D.A. (1983) Alkaloids of Pan-
the Gods. Praeger, New York, pp. 237-260.
cratium trianthum Herb. Farmatsiya 32, 22-24.
Gelfand, M., Mavi, S., Drummond, R.B. and Ndemera, B.
Nyazema, N.Z. (1984) Poisoning due to traditional remedies.
(1985) The traditional medical practitioner in Zimbabwe.
Central African Journal of Medicine 30, 80-83.
His principles of practice and pharmacopoeia. Mambo
Onanga, M. and Khuong-Huu, F. (1980) Alcaloi'des du
Press, Gweru, p. 108.
Mostuea brunonis Didr. var. brunonis. Comptes Rendus de
Gundidza, M. (1985) Phytochemical screening of some Zim-
l'Academie des Sciences Paris S~rie C 291, 191-193.
babwean medicinal plants. Central African Journal of Medi-
Paris, R. and Moyse-Mignon, H. (1949) l~tude chimique et
cine 31,238-239. pharmacodynamique prdiminaire d'une Loganiac~e du
Gundidza, M. (1986) Insecticidal activity of Monadenium lugar-
Gabon: Mostuea stimulans A.Chev. Comptes Rendus de
dae latex. Planta Medica p. 558.
l'Academie des Sciences 229, 86-88.

## Page 6

146 P.A.G.M. De Smet / Journal of Ethnopharmacology 50 (1996) 141-146
Pope Jr., H.G. (1969) Tabernanthe iboga: an African narcotic Schultes, R.E. and Hofmann, A. (1980a) Pflanzen der G6tter --
plant of social importance. Economic Botany 23, 174-184. Die magischen Kri~fte der Rausch- und Giftgewiichse.
Popelak, A., Haack, E., Lettenbauer, G. and Spingler, H. Hallwag Verlag, Bern.
(1960a) Zur Konstitution des Mesembrins. Natur- Schultes, R.E. and Hofmann, A. (1980b) The botany and chem-
wissenschaften 47, 156. istry of hallucinogens. 2rid edn. Charles C. Thomas
Popelak, A., Lettenbauer, G., Haack, E. and Spingler, H. Publisher, Springfield.
(1960b) Die Struktur des Mesembrins und Mesembrenins. Sener, B., Koenuekol, S., Kruk, C. and Pandit, U:K. (1993)
Naturwissenschaften 47, 231-232. Alkaloids of iycorine and lycorenine class from Pancratium
Puiseux, F., Patel, M.P., Rowson, J.M. and Poisson, J. (1965) maritimum L. Archiv der Pharmazie (Weinheim) 326,
Alcaloides des Voacanga: Voacanga bracteata Stapf. An- 61-62.
hales Pharmaceutiques Franf,a ises 23, 33-39. Thomsen, T., Bickel, U., Fisher, J.P. and Kewitz, H. (1990)
Quevauviller, A. and Blanpin, O. (1957a) I~tude phar- Stereoselectivity of cholinesterase inhibition by galan-
macodynamique de la voacamine, alcaloide de Voacanga thamine and tolerance in humans. European Journal of
africana, Apocynac6es. Thdrapie 12, 635-647. Clinical Pharmacology 39, 603-606.
Quevauviiler, A. and Blanpin, O. (1957b) l~tude phar- Tutin, F. (1912) Ober die Bestandteile von Buphane disticha.
macodynamique compar6e de la voacamine et de la Archiv J~r Experimentelle Pathologie und Pharmakologie 69,
voacorine, alcaloides du Voacanga africana Stapf 314.
(Apocynac6es). Annales Pharmaceutiques Frangaises 15, Tyler Jr., V.E. (1966) The physiological properties and chemi-
617-630. cal constituents of some habit-forming plants. Lloydia 29,
Raymond-Hamet (1952a) L'Alchornea floribunda Mfiller ou 275-292.
Niando. Revue lnternationale de Botanique Appliqude et Vazquez Tato, M.P., Castedo, L. and Riguera, R. (1988) New
d'Agriculture Tropicale 32, 427-442. alkaloids from Pancratium maritimum L. Heterocycles
Raymond-Hamet (1952b) Influence d'une Euphorbiac6e de (Tokyo) 27, 2833-2838.
l'Afrique tropicale: Alchornea floribunda A. Miiller Arg., Watt, J.M. (1967) African plants useful in mental health.
sur la r6flectivit6 sino-carotidienne et sur I'excitabilit6 du Lloydia 30, 1-22.
pneumogastrique. Comptes Rendus de l'Academie des Watt, J.M. and Breyer-Brandwijk, M.G. (1962) The medicinal
Sciences Biol 146, 1672-1674. and poisonous plants of Southern and Eastern Africa. 2nd
Raymond-Hamet and Goutarel, R. (1965) L'Alchornea edn. E. & S. Livingstone, Edinburgh.
floribunda Mueller Arg. doit-il/t la yohimbine ses effets ex-
citants chez l'homme? Comptes Rendus de I'Academie des
Sciences Paris 261, 3223-3224.

