# Review on plants with CNS-effects used in traditional South African medicine against mental diseases

Gary I. Stafford a, Mikael E. Pedersen b, Johannes van Staden a, Anna K. Jäger b,∗

a Research Centre for Plant Growth and Development, School of Conservation Sciences, University of KwaZulu-Natal, Pietermaritzburg, Private Bag X01, Scottsville 3209, South Africa b Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 2 Universitetsparken, 2100 Copenhagen O,

# a r t i c l e i n f o

# a b s t r a c t

Article history:   
Received 15 May 2008   
Received in revised form 2 August 2008   
Accepted 5 August 2008   
Available online 15 August 2008

Keywords:   
Ageing   
Alzheimer’s disease   
Epilepsy   
Depression   
Mental health   
South African traditional medicine

The majority of the population in South Africa use traditional health care to treat various mental conditions. In this review, we present ethnobotanical information on plants used by the traditional healers in South Africa to treat mental illnesses, specifically epilepsy, depression, age-related dementia and debilitative mental disorders. Details of the recent scientific studies conducted on some of these plants are reviewed.

Extracts of Searsia chirindensis, Cotelydon orbiculata and Leonotis leonurus have shown in vivo anticonvulsant activity. Extracts from Searsia dentata and Searsia pyroides showed spontaneous epileptiform discharge in mouse cortical slices, and acted as NMDA-receptor antagonists. Apigenin, amentoflavone and agathisflavone with affinity to the benzodiazepine site on the GABAA-receptor were isolated from Searsia pyroides. Naringenin with affinity to the GABAA-benzodiazepine receptor was isolated from Mentha aquatica.

Agapanthus campanulatus, Boophone disticha, Mondia whitei and Xysmalobium undulatum exhibited antidepressant-like activity in three in vivo models for depression. Amaryllidaceae alkaloids with activity to the serotonin transporter were isolated from Boophone disticha. The alkaloid mesembrine, which act as a serotonin reuptake inhibitor, was isolated from Sceletium tortuosum.

Investigations of plants used to treat age-related dementia and debilitative mental disorders lead to the isolation of a number of Amaryllidaceae alkaloids with acetylcholinesterase inhibitory activity from Boophone disticha and Crinum species. Extracts of Mentha aquatica, Gasteria croucheri, Ruta graveolens and Scotia brachypetala inhibited MAO-B. Naringenin was isolated from Mentha aquatica as a MAO inhibitor.

Only a small number of the more than 300 southern African plant species reported to treat or affect the CNS have been scientifically evaluated. Very few of the active compounds have been isolated and identified.

© 2008 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

# 1. Introduction

Currently in South Africa a dual healthcare system exists: one based on traditional medicine and another based on Western medical practice. The use of traditional medicine in South Africa is widespread where it is estimated that as high as 80% of the black population consult traditional healers. The more available traditional healthcare system offers a cheap, individualized and culturally appropriate alternative to the costly allopathic system. The state healthcare system with 8000 doctors including 18 neurologists provides aid for 85% of the population (approximately 38 million people) whereas 15% of the population (approximately 7 million people) is covered by private healthcare system with 12,000 doctors including 55 neurologists (Eastman, 2005). The number of traditional healers, on the other hand, outnumbers the allopathic doctors by at least 10 to 1 (Morris, 2001).

Traditional practice may include psychological, spiritual and cultural elements, as well as a medical element. This review deals with the medical element, namely the plants traditional healers use in their treatments. In this paper we will review plants used in South African traditional medicine in these categories of indications: epilepsy and convulsions, depression, age-related dementia and debilitative mental disorders.

Table 1 Southern African plants traditionally used for sedative, anticonvulsant and epilepsy treatments   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Family Species</td><td>Traditional use, ethnobotanical information and known active constituents</td></tr><tr><td>Adiantaceae (Pteridaceae) Pellaea calomelanos (Swartz) Link</td><td>night (Hutchings et al., 1996) presumably to calm them</td></tr><tr><td>Alliaceae Tulbaghia alliaceae L.f. Ishaladi lezinyoka Tulbaghia violaceae Harv. Syn: Omentaria cepacea Salisb.,</td><td>mean 'garli/shallts of the snakes', the plant pats sel of garli and is used by uu a asake repellent (Hutching t al, 1996) young children (Batten and Bokelmann, 1966) presumably to calm them</td></tr><tr><td>haqa (v) surround, encircle, enclose Amaryllidaceae Boophone disticha (L.f.) Herb. Syn: B. longepedicellata Pax</td><td>induce hallucinations for divinatory purposes, an to treat mental illness (Sobiecki, 2002)</td></tr><tr><td>Incotho, incwadi (Z) Anacardiaceae Lannea discolor (Sond.) Engl.</td><td>The Luvale of Zambia use the leaves to prevent fits (Watt and Breyer-Brandwijk, 1962)</td></tr><tr><td>Lannea schweinfurthii (Engl.) Engl. Searsia chirindensis (Baker f.) Moffett Syn: Rhus chirindensis Bak. f.</td><td>and Gericke, 2000) T</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>pentylenetetrazole-induced seizures (Ojewole, 2008c). The plant': extract (100-800 mg/kg i.p.) also profoundly antagonized picrotoxin-induced seiz GABAA-benzodiazepine receptor assay (Risa et al., 2004a,b) Roots are used to treat fi ts in children (Watt and Breyer-Brandwijk, 1962)</td></tr><tr><td>Searsia natalensis (Bernh. ex Krauss) F.A. Barkley Syn: Rhus natalensis Bernh. ex krauss</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Searsia pyroides (Burch.) Moffett Syn: Rhus pyroides Burch.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Annonaceae Artabotrys brachypetalus Benth.</td><td>et al., 2006)</td></tr><tr><td>Mukosvo (Sh)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>2002)</td></tr><tr><td>Apiaceae</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Alepidea amatymbica Eckl. and Zeyh.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Ikathazo (Z)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>khathazo (n) a kind of herb used  </td><td></td></tr><tr><td>remedy (Dent and Nyembezi, 1999)</td><td>communication with ancestors (Hutchings et al., 1996; van Wyk et al., 1997)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Arctopus echinatus L.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>and Sothoeicinal lant, withan quall ich thbotanicalhistory (vanWyk t al; van Wy and Gericke, 20; Magee 207)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

<html><body><table><tr><td>Centella asiatica (L.) Urb.*</td><td>Diedi2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>i i ivi  i  ie is</td></tr><tr><td>Steganotaenia araliacea Hochst.</td><td>shown to exert a dose-dependent increase in GABA levels, in rat brain (Chatterjee et al., 1992) The Shona of Zimbabwe use root infusions taken in porridge to treat epilepsy (Gelfand et al., 1985)</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Apocynaceae</td></tr><tr><td>Acokanthera oppositifolia (Lam.) Codd Ubuhlungu-benyoka (Z) –hlungu (n) pain,</td><td>Lea infusiinistst in tau veiss tngtitt e</td></tr><tr><td>nyoka (n) snake – pain of the snake Carissa edulis Vahl</td><td>In Mal tts  it  ts ofraipna Plac)e  as    e</td></tr><tr><td>Syn: Azima pubescens Suess. Rauwolfia caffra Sond.</td><td>D   </td></tr><tr><td>Syn: R. natalensis Sond. Quinine-tree (E), kinaboom (A)</td><td>the Ta inl bark of umhlambamanzi (Z) to ward off 'evil spirits' (Hutchings et al., 1996)</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Araceae</td></tr><tr><td>Acorus calamus L.*</td><td>Grud hiefr s disorr,), t aoixithaCabisati) y distinv , s ,  </td></tr><tr><td>(sometime under Acoraceae) Ikalamuzi (Z)</td><td>antitheic, ggic an auilizing eftCh, , hizesd tsave aivealgesic perteat, ;</td></tr><tr><td>Araliaceae Cussonia longissima Hutch. & Dalz..</td><td>myristicin and kava alkaloids) are presumed to be active hallucinogenic principles (Lewis and Elvin-Lewis, 1977) Ina</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>disease (Watt and Breyer-Brandwijk, 1962)</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Asclepiadaceae Gomphocarpus physocarpus E. Mey</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Leaves used to 'strengthen body' (Pujol, 1990), powdered leaf is used as sedative (van Wyk and Gericke, 2000)</td></tr><tr><td>Asparagaceae Asparagus species</td><td>Roots of de  ts  iii o i ia9</td></tr><tr><td>Asparagus virgatus Baker</td><td>(Syn   (.   nas i </td></tr><tr><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td>the ill-omen, it is used as a protective</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>charm to ward off the effects of evil</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>(Pooley, 2005) Asphodelaceae</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Bulbine latifolia (L. f.) Roem. & Schult. Ibhucu (Z)^</td><td>Dectia  n  in  engv underg b) oati u a ins ihil rost is er </td></tr><tr><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>infusion taken in small doses twice daily, two teaspoons for convulsions (Pujol, 1990)</td></tr><tr><td>Asteraceae</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Arctotis arctotoides (L. f.) O. Hoffm.</td><td>Leaf juice is a Xhosa treatment for epilepsy in South Africa (Watt and Breyer-Brandwijk, 1962)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>B)</td></tr><tr><td>Blumea alata (D. Don) DC.</td><td>Leaves are used in Zimbabwe for enemas to treat convulsions (Gelfand et al., 1985)</td></tr><tr><td>Cenia sericea DC.</td><td>Used in the easter ape region of South Africa to asist with restful sleep and o break high fever(Batten and Bokelmann, 96)</td></tr><tr><td>Conyza scabrida DC.</td><td>Early recods in South Aficauggest that eaf decotions ar adinistered o children ffering fro convulsions (ith, 1895)</td></tr><tr><td>Dicoma shinzii O. Hoffm.</td><td>Ued to i   </td></tr><tr><td>Helichrysum odoratissimum (L.) Sweet</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>reportedy aive,  help fr insiaTefoHelic fti L) ec anHic stenpteDC. iab</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>induce a trance (van Wyk and Gericke, 200o)</td></tr><tr><td>Launaea nana (Bak.) Chiov.</td><td>The Sh   e  n </td></tr><tr><td></td><td>)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Oncosiphon piluliferum (L.f.) Kallersjo</td><td>Reported used as part of a European remedy for treating convulsions in the cape of South Africa (Watt, 1967)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

<html><body><table><tr><td>Table 1 (Continued) Family Species</td><td>Traditional use, ethnobotanical information and known active constituents</td></tr><tr><td>Oncosiphon suffruticosum (L.) Kallersjo</td><td>(Chenopodiaceae) or Ruta graveolens (Rutaceae, wynruit (A)) to treat infantile convulsions (van Wyk and Gericke, 200)</td></tr><tr><td>Tarchonanthus camphorates L.</td><td>D Gericke, 2000)</td></tr><tr><td>Vermonia neocorymbosa Hilliard</td><td>Rs  )</td></tr><tr><td>Bignoniaceae</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Markhamia obtusifolia (Bak.) Sprague Tecomaria capensis (Thunb.) Spach Lungana (Z)</td><td>The roots are used for children with convulsions in East Africa and Malawi (Williamson, 1974) Dried powdered bark infusions are taken for sleeplessness(Roberts, 1990); reported t induce sleep (Hutching et al, 996)</td></tr><tr><td>Boraginaceae Lithospermum cinereum DC.</td><td>The plant is used as a sedative by the Sotho (Ashton, 1943). Details of the administration were not given</td></tr><tr><td>Capparaceae Bosica albitrunca (Burch.) Gilg & Ben</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Umlalampisi (Z) lala (n) sleep, lie down;</td><td>magical purposes (Pooley, 1993)</td></tr><tr><td>mpisi (n) hyena Maerua angolensis DC.</td><td>convulsions (Mabogo, 1990; Venter and Venter, 1996)</td></tr><tr><td>Celastraceae</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Maytenus senegalensis (Lam.) Excell Syn: Gymnosporia senegalensis (Lam.)</td><td>T (2002) mentions the inclusion of this plant in beer as an aphrodisiac</td></tr><tr><td>Loes Maytenus heterophylla (Eckl. & Zeyh.)</td><td>In various parts of East Africa, root decoctions are taken for epilepsy (Kokwaro, 1976)</td></tr><tr><td>N.K.B. Robson Syn: Gymnosporia heterophylla (Eckl. &</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Zeyh.) Loes. Pleurostylia capensis (Turcz.) Loes</td><td>In the cape of South Africa unspecifed parts are used to encourage sleep and to bring good dreams (De Jager, 1963)</td></tr><tr><td>Syn: Cathastrum capense TurcZ., P. africana Loes.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Chenopodiaceae Exomis microphylla (Thumb.)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Oncosiphon suffrticosum; used in a treatment fr infantileconvulsions, together with uta graveolens VanWyk and Gericke, 200)</td></tr><tr><td>Combretaceae Combretum adenogonium Steud. ex A.</td><td>Unspecified parts are used in Zimbabwe for the treatment of convulsions in children (Gelfand et al., 1985)</td></tr><tr><td>Rich. Syn Combretum ternifolium Engl. & Diels</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Combretum molle R. Br. ex G. Don</td><td>Roots are used for convulsions and as an aphrodisiac in Zimbabwe (Gelfand et al., 1985)</td></tr><tr><td>Terminalia species</td><td>A</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>(Watt and Breyer-Brandwijk, 192). Roots of Terminalia stenostachya Engl. &Diels o treat epilepsy i imbabwe Gelfand et al, 1985)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Commelinaceae</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Commelina africana L.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Breyer-Brandwijk, 1962)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Convolvulaceae Ipomoea species</td><td>cir   </td></tr><tr><td>Ipomoea obscura Usiboniseleni (Z) – what has been shown to us.Used in traditional medicine as a</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Ipomoea ficifolia ikhambilesihlungu (Z) − herb of poison. Used to treat snake-bites Ipomoea crassipes</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Uvimbukhalo (Z) – what blocks up the loins. Used in traditional medicine to treat dysentery Crassulaceae</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Cotyledon orbiculata L.</td><td>Sotho for various diseases (unspecified) and as a protective 'charm There are early reports of unspecified parts being used in South Africa to treat epilepsy (Pappe, 1857)</td></tr><tr><td>Crassula arborescens (Mill.) Willd. Cucurbitaceae</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Cucumis hirsutus Sond.</td><td>R 15). </td></tr><tr><td>Uthangazane (Z) thanga 'pumpkin' + azi 'biggish' + ane 'smallish', i.e. a plant</td><td>Cucumis myriocarpus Naud. is used to make dogs ferocious in Zimbabwe (Gelfand et al., 1985)</td></tr><tr><td>resembling a medium-sized pumpkin Momordica balsamina L</td><td>D </td></tr><tr><td>Inkaka, intshungu (Z)</td><td>Paraguay the roots are used to treat epilepsy (Watt and Breyer-Brandwijk, 1962)</td></tr><tr><td>Dioscoreaceae</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Dioscorea diversiflora Griseb</td><td>Unspecified groups in southern Africa use tubers to treat hysterical fits (Watt and Breyer-Brandwijk, 1962)</td></tr><tr><td>Udakwa (Z) dakwa (v) be drunk, be intoxicated</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Dioscorea dregeana Baker</td><td>Ter isf</td></tr><tr><td>Ilabatheka (Z) – (n) for causing madness</td><td>B-</td></tr><tr><td>or excitement; Undiyaza (Z) – be stunned, confused,</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>giddy' Udakwa (Z) – being drunk</td><td>faine f ttr-r, )er r oalsi f t b</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Ebenaceae Euclea crispa (Thumb.) Guerke</td><td>I i</td></tr><tr><td>Idungamuzi (Z) male plant;</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Umsekisane (Z) female plant</td><td>(A.DC.D  er a  n see  ai)</td></tr><tr><td>Diospyros lyciodes Desf.</td><td>ThVen epilepsy (Gelfand et al., 1985)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Euphorbiaceae</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Antidesma venosum E. Mey. ex Tul.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Th toxic -  i i  </td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Bridelia cathartica Bertol. f.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>been bewitched (Gerstner, 1941)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 1 (Continued )   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Family Species</td><td>Traditional use, ethnobotanical information and known active constituents</td></tr><tr><td>Colloquial name – meaning1 Croton gratissimus Burch.</td><td>Th fuesfs itrtnt a  ae)</td></tr><tr><td>Ihubeshane-elikhulu</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Flueggea virosa (Roxb. ex Willd.) Voigt. Jatropha curcas L.</td><td>Leaf sap is reported to be used to treat epilepsy and mental illness in East Africa (Haerdi, 1964)</td></tr><tr><td>Inhlakuva (Z) also the Zulu name for castor-oil bean (Ricinus communis)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Fabaceae Abrus precatorius L.</td><td>1982). The leaves with palm oil are taken to treat convulsions in Ghana and Gabon (Dalziel, 1937)</td></tr><tr><td>Syn: A. squamulosus E.Mey. Umkoka (Z)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Acacia amythethophylla Steud. ex A. Rich.</td><td>Zimbabwe (Gelfand et al., 1985).</td></tr><tr><td>Acacia karoo Hayne Isikhombe, umunga (Z)</td><td>In Zimbabwe the roots are used for eneral body pains, diziness, convulsions and as an aphodiasiac(Gelfand et al, 185)</td></tr><tr><td>Bauhinia thonningi Schumach</td><td>P )</td></tr><tr><td>Bolusanthus speciosus (H. Bol.) Harms Caesalpinia bondac (L.) Roxb.</td><td>Roots reported to have sleep-inducing effect by the Tsonga people (Liengme, 1981)</td></tr><tr><td>Chamaecrista mimosoides (L.) Greene</td><td>(Watt and Breyer-Brandwijk, 1962)</td></tr><tr><td>Imbubu yotaboni (Z), umbonisela (Z)</td><td>Hutchings et al., 1996)</td></tr><tr><td>Desmodium barbatum (L.) Benth. Syn: D. dimorphum Welw. ex Baker var.</td><td>Infue  t ,is yr v ai ie )</td></tr><tr><td>argyreum Welw. ex Baker, Nicolsonia barbata (L.) DC. var. argyrae (Welw. ex</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Baker) Schindl. Millettia grandis (E.Mey.) Skeels</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Mimosa pudica L.*</td><td>licked from fi ngers to induce sleep (Palmer and Pitman, 1972)</td></tr><tr><td>Mimosa pigra L. Imbune (Z) buna (v) wilt, droop, become</td><td>used as an ingredient in preparations designed to make an enemy impotent (Hutchings et al., 1996)</td></tr><tr><td>emaciated Umazifisa (Z)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Newtonia hildebrandti (Vatke) Torre Udongolokamadilika (Z), umfomothi (Z)</td><td>1972)</td></tr><tr><td>man medicine Senna didymobotrya (Fresenius) N.W.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Irwin & R.C. Barneby Syn. Cassia didymobotrya Fresen.</td><td>occidentalis (L.) Link are used in India to treat convulsions in children (Lal and Gupta, 1973)</td></tr><tr><td>Senna petersiana (Bolle) J.M.</td><td>A</td></tr><tr><td>Lock</td><td>Gulumian, 1984)</td></tr><tr><td>Syn. Cassia petersiana Bolle</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Tephrosia capensis (Jacq.) Pers.</td><td>T</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Isidamvulu, isikhwali (Z)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>(Watt and Breyer-Brandwijk, 1962)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Vigna species</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>root is used in infusions prepared with porridge to treat epilepsy in Zimbabwe (Gelfand et al., 1985)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Gentianaceae Chironia krebsii Griseb.</td><td>Used for relieving uneasines uring prgnancy by theSotho(Watt and Breyer-Brandwik, 1962). Preparations frm Chironia bacifer and perspiration (Watt and Breyer-Brandwijk, 1962)</td></tr><tr><td>Hyacinthaceae</td><td>Bulbs aree to iebriatethos ring iision itual aBrye-Brai, 2). This edicin is pre</td></tr><tr><td>Ledebouria cooperi (Hook. f.) Jessop Syn: Scilla adlamii Baker, Scilla cinerascens Van der Merwe, Scilla cooperi Hook.f., Scilla galpini Baker, Scilla glaucescens Van der Merwe, Scilla inandensis Baker, Scilla petiolata Van der Merwe, Scilla pusilla Baker, Scilla</td><td>(Scrophulariaceae) and causes the boys to appear stunned, stupefed and to fall asleep (Hutchings et al., 1996)</td></tr><tr><td>Merwe, Scilla saturata Baker icubudwana (Z) Schizocarphus nervosus (Burch.) Van der Merwe Syn. Ornithogalum nervosum Burch. S. acerosus Van der Merwe, S. gerrardii (Baker) Van der Merwe, S. rigidifolius</td><td>Ground s ini ruses an a oele nus cdtion in chiden yunecifds in ipt </td></tr><tr><td>Baker, Scilla nervosa(Burch.) Jesso, Scilla rigidifolia Baker, Scilla rigidifolia Baker var. acerosa Van der Merwe, Scilla rigidifolia Baker var. nervosa</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Ingcino, ingcolo (Z) Hypoxidaceae</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Hypoxis hemerocallidea Fisch. & C.A. Mey</td><td>Corm infusions used to eat insanit in SouhicaPjol, ).Anticvuat activit foxis eercallda coas (Ojewole, 2008b).</td></tr><tr><td>Lamiaceae Ballota africana (L.) Benth. Syn: Marrubium africanum L.</td><td>Infusions or brandy inctures are used, in the Western ape for the treatment of ysteria and insomnia van Wyk and Gericke, 200)</td></tr><tr><td>Hemizygia bracteosa (Benth.) Briq.</td><td>The laves are smoked or chewed by the San in Botswana to give energy for dancing and as astimulant (van Wyk and Gericke, 200)</td></tr><tr><td>Hoslundia opposita Vahl</td><td>used powdered leaves orally to treat fi ts (Gelfand et al., 1985) In Ziae ot infusions a ue t at f deile t , ).Hsnda species ase inestAfia </td></tr><tr><td>Leonotis leonurus (L.) R.Br.</td><td>1978). Leaf extracts showed GABAergic activity (Risa et al., 2004a,b) This plant is ported tobemilly nacoticWat and Breyer-Brandi, 2). Leaves are eported tohave en soked for patial p</td></tr><tr><td>Ocimim canum Sims</td><td>Breye-Branwi,; Hutchin t al, 1).Auus xtacts aereporedtaveanticonvulant activit in anial studisi The Ndebele of Zimbabwe use the whole plant together with the seds of Ricinus communis L*and Chenopodium ambrosidiodes Las</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>1985).Unspecifd grups inMalai bun he aves and inale e s, nd l wash the body of the patient with decoctins of et l .n enic theaes eter wit of n nsis cerae nusea aatf</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>are used in west Africa to treat delirium (Ayensu, 1978)</td></tr><tr><td>Pycnostachys urticifolia Hook</td><td>The roots aaten in pi or applid to the face an sed in ses oea adne  onulsins in ae Gelndt</td></tr><tr><td>Salvia chamelaeagnea Berg.</td><td>Unspeifed grups in theape of outhAficaused n infusion of the died eaves s rtent for nvulsions Wat ad eye-</td></tr><tr><td>Stachys thunbergii Benth.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>aethiopica L. is reportedly burnt in huts to cure feverish delirium in Lesotho (Jacot Guillarmod, 1971)</td></tr><tr><td>Tinnea zambesiaca Bak.</td><td>The Shona of Zimbabwe use the roots and leaves as a body wash for convulsions (Gelfand et al., 1985)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Lauraceae</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Cinnamomum camphora (L.) T. Ness &</td><td>Athoughot an digenus plan t has eea pplar aition edicine o t avar of coplaints, usd oea st</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>C.H. Eberm.*</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Loganiaceae (Buddlejaceae and Strychnaceae)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Used together ithHetermopha tifoliteWend) Eck&Zyh. and Cussonia paniculata EckZeyh.y Sotho in SouthAfrica  e</td></tr><tr><td>Buddleja (L.) species</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>(Watt and Breyer-Brandwijk, 1962)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

<html><body><table><tr><td>Table 1 (Continued)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Family Species</td><td>Traditional use, ethnobotanical information and known active constituents</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Colloquial name – meaning1</td></tr><tr><td>Nuxia floribunda Benth. Syn: Lachnopylis floribunda (Benth.) C.A.Sm.</td><td>convulsions and in rituals in unspecified parts of Africa (Iwu, 1993)</td></tr><tr><td>Loranthaceae Loranthus oleifolius (Wend.) Cham. & Schlechtd. Syn: Tapinanthus oleifolius (J.C.Wend1.)</td><td>by the Shona of Zimbabwe to treat epilepsy, madness and convulsions (Gelfand et al., 1985)</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Danser, L. meyeri C.Presl, L. meyeri C.Presl var. inachabensis Engl., L. namaquensis Harv., L. namaquensis Harv. var. ligustrifolius Engl., L. speciosus</td></tr><tr><td>F.Dietr., T. namaquensis (Harv.) Tiegh. Meliaceae Melia azedarach L.*</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Turraea floribunda Hochst.</td><td>sedative and depressant properties in animal studies in Nigeria (Adesina, 1982)</td></tr><tr><td>dlozane (isi-, izi-)(n) nape of the neck dlozi (i-, ama-) (n) spirit of the departed, guardian spirit, ancestral spirit Turraea nilotica Kotschy & Peyr</td><td>aka eerGere, ), Repetepoisus ierdsesa en ts not pecifedWataye-Bran,1962) R inf r a  e</td></tr><tr><td>Nymania capensis (Thunb.) Lindb.</td><td>unspecified parts to treat convulsions (Laidler, 1928)</td></tr><tr><td>Melianthaceae Bersama lucens (Hochst.) Szyszyl.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Isindiyandiya, undiyaza (Z)</td><td>spirits (Hutchings et al., 1996) and to confuse one's opponents in court (Doke and Vilakazi, 1972)</td></tr><tr><td>Mesembryanthemaceae</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Conophytum species Toontjies (A)</td><td>The genus is reputed to have narcotic properties (Watt, 1967), lso believed to have sedative properties (van Wyk and Gericke, 200)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Myrothamnaceae Myrothamnus fl abellfolius Welw.</td><td>Unspecified parts are administered by healers in Zimbabwe to treat epilepsy and madness (Gelfand et al., 1985)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Myrsinaceae Rapanea melanophloeos (L.) Mez</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>three times a day by persons who feel like crying' (Hutchings et al., 1996)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Orchidaceae</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Eulophia species</td><td>Unidentifed species known as umahayiza (Z) are reported to be used as emetics to treat hysterical fts (Gerstner, 1941)</td></tr><tr><td>Umahayiza (Z)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>hayiza (v) be hysterical</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Passiffloraceae</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Adenia gummifera (Harv.) Harms</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>treat madness and epilepsy (Gelfand et al., 1985)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="2">Imfulwa (Z), Impinda (Z) (n) a recurrence</td></tr><tr><td>Pedaliaceae</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Periplocaceae Mondia whitei (Hook. f.) Skeels Syn: Chlorocodon whitei Hook.f.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Umondi (Z) Pittosporaceae Pittosporum viridiflorum Sims</td><td>adults (van Wyk and Gericke, 2000)</td></tr><tr><td>Umkhwenkhwe (X, Z), Umfusamvu (Z) Plumbaginaceae Plumbago auriculata Lam.</td><td>P </td></tr><tr><td>Umasheleshele (Z) Polygalaceae Nylandtia spinosa (L.) Dumort.</td><td>B induce trance state (Winkelman and Dobkin De Rios, 1989).</td></tr><tr><td>Syn: Mundia spinosa (L.) DC. Securidaca longipedunculata Fresen.</td><td>narcotic (Kling, 1923)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>1985). The plant is reported to contain the toxic indole alkaloid securinine and some ergot alkaloids (van Wyk and Gericke, 200)</td></tr><tr><td>Polygonaceae Oxygonum species</td><td>Roots of unspecified Oxygonum species, possibly 0 m Meisr are used in medicines taken to treat convulsions in Zimbabwe (Gelfand et al.</td></tr><tr><td>Portulacaceae</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Talinum species</td><td>S</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>heart palpitations, possible caused by anxiety (Hedberg and Staugard, 1989)</td></tr><tr><td>Proteaceae Faurea saligna Harv.</td><td>Infused geher ithedrataac is ten ralyayfr vs o aeie iaen5)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Ptaeroxylaceae (Rutaceae) Ptaeroxylon obliquum (Thunb.) Radlk.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Syn: P. utile Eckl. & Zeyh.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>A</td></tr><tr><td>Sneezewood (E), umthati (X)</td><td>recreational purposes (Watt and Breyer-Brandwijk, 1962)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Rhamnaceae</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Helinus integrifolius (Lam.) Kuntze.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Syn: H. ovatus E.Mey. ex Sond., H.</td><td>pinnata L. (Fabaceae) and stirred with cold water until it froths (saponins) (Bryant, 1966)</td></tr><tr><td>scandens (Eckl. & Zeyh.) A.Rich. Soap creeper (E),</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Uphuphuphu (Z) –(ideo) frothing</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Rhamnus prinoides L'Herit.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>to inhance the narcotic effects of traditional beer (Watt and Breyer-Brandwijk, 1962)</td></tr><tr><td>Syn: Celtis rhamnifolia C.Presl</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Dogwood (Z)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="2">Table 1 (Continued)</td></tr><tr><td>Family Species Colloquial name – meaning1</td><td>Traditional use, ethnobotanical information and known active constituents</td></tr><tr><td>Rosaceae Rubus ludwigi Eckl. & Zeyh.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Syn: R. rhodacantha E.Mey. Imencemence, tshalo, unomhloshane (Z) Rubiaceae Catunaregam species</td><td>and Breyer-Brandwijk, 1962)</td></tr><tr><td>Syn: C. spinosa(Thunb.) Tirveng. Thorny bone-apple Note: C. spinosa (Thunb) Tirveng. [Xeromphis obovata (Hochst.) Keay] occurs in China and is not found in</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Africa. Gardenia species Pachystigma pygmaeum (Schltr) Robyns Syn: Vangueria pygmaea Schltr.; Vangueria setosa Conrath</td><td>inhaled to treat convulsions in Zimbabwe (Gelfand et al., 1985)</td></tr><tr><td>Rutaceae Clausena anisata (Willd.) Hook. f. ex</td><td>Zulu in an emetic for illness believed to be inficted by evil spirits or by the ancestors (Hutchings et al., 1996)</td></tr><tr><td>Benth. Ruta graveolens L. Wynruit (A) Zanthoxylum capense (Thunb.) Harv.</td><td>Africa (Watt and Breyer-Brandwijk, 1962)</td></tr><tr><td>Syn Fagara capensis Thunb. Santalaceae</td><td>huans nd ialsWat and Breer-Brani, 1) Apecie fantho i ed t t ental ess in aon (aler, 1953)</td></tr><tr><td>Osyridicarpos schimperianus (Hochst. ex A. Rich.) A. DC. Umalala (Z) −(n) sleeping</td><td>Leaves and stems are used to make babies sleep (Manana, 1968; Hutchings et al., 1996)</td></tr><tr><td>Sapotaceae Englerophytum magalismontanum Krause Umnugumabele (Z)</td><td>fit )</td></tr><tr><td>Stamvrug (A) Scrophulariaceae</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Harveya huttoni Hiern. Phygelius capensis E. Mey. ex Benth.</td><td>Rot ce eifdg aiver usion in teasteapenofufa ae ea,66)</td></tr><tr><td>Mafifi matso (S)</td><td>causes the boys to appear stunned, stupefi ed and to fall asleep (Hutchings et al., 1996)</td></tr><tr><td>Simaroubaceae Ailanthus altissima (Mill.) Swingle*</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Root bark reportedly used to treat epilepsy in South Africa (Potter, 1932)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Solanaceae</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Datura ferox L*</td><td>Leaves used to sedate hysterical and psychotic patients, also to treat insomnia (van Wyk and Gericke, 2000)</td></tr><tr><td>lloyi (Z)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Datura stramonium L.*</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>lloyi (Z)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>loya (v) bewitch, hypnotise</td><td>antiepileptogenic effect in rats (Peredery and Persinger, 2004)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

<html><body><table><tr><td>Withania somnifera (L.) Dun* Syn: Physalis somnifera L., W.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>microphysalis Suess Ubuvimbha (Z) vimba (v) prevent, close up, stop</td><td>elderly with learning and memory retention (van Wyk and Gericke, 2000)</td></tr><tr><td>Sterculiaceae Hermannia hyssopifolia L. Thymelaeaceae Synaptolepis kirki Oliv.</td><td>Root decoctions are used among Europeans as an old Cape remedy for fits (Watt and Breyer-Brandwijk, 1962)</td></tr><tr><td>Uvuma-omhlophe (Z) vuma (v) clap hands during the process of divining mhlophe (adv) white or clarity</td><td>al., 1996)</td></tr><tr><td>Valerianaceae Valeriana capensis Thunb.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Verbenaceae Clerodendrum species</td><td>Brandwijk, 1962). Leaf decoctions of Clerodendrum</td></tr><tr><td>Lippia javanica (Burm. .) Speng. Vitex rehmannii Guerke</td><td>in sweet beer to treat epilepsy in Zimbabwe (Gelfand et al., 1985) ) Unspecified parts used to treat hysteric fits by the Zulu (Gerstner, 1941)</td></tr><tr><td>umluthu (Z), unduly (Z) luthu (ideo) of aiming true; lutha (v) mislead, make a fool of.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Vitex wilmsi Guerke Umluthu (Z)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Viscaceae Viscum species Indembu, iphakama (Z)</td><td>)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Siphonochilus aethiopicus (Schweinf.) B.L.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Zingiberaceae</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>overdosing causes drowsiness (Hutchings et al., 1996)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Burtt</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Indungulo (Z)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Unspecifed groups in South Africa use rhizome infusions to treat epilepsy and hysteria (van Wyk and Gericke, 2000)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>dungula (v) put enemy to flight,</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>isiphephetho (Z)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>phephetha (v) be blown away; soothe</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>by blowing air; destroy</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

1(A): Afrikaans, (E): English, (S): Sotho, (Sh): Shona, (X): Xhosa, (Z): Zulu; \* non-indigenous species.

Table 2 Southern African plants traditionally used for treat depression and similar CNS ailments   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Family Species</td><td>Traditional use, ethnobotanical information and known active constituents</td></tr><tr><td>Colloquial name – meaning1</td><td></td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Alliaceae</td></tr><tr><td>Agapanthus campanulatus</td><td rowspan="2">Used in the initiation of radition ealersutching  al, 6).Various pars ae ed y he Sotho o eat peplwith (Laydevan, 1). Theul ae repored tuse nidentifd pecies ofAgapantus fr nducing visios iibon) nd deas </td></tr><tr><td>F.M.Leight. (Agapanthaceae) Syn: A. patens F.M.Leight.</td></tr><tr><td>Ubani (Z)</td><td>(Nielsen et al., 2004)</td></tr><tr><td>Amaryllidaceae Ammocharis coranica (Ker-Gawl.) Herb.</td><td>Used to trat serius affictions(nspeied) caused by witchraft (Hume, 1954). Kown to contain buphanidrine(Gibbs, 1974) transporter (SERT) protein (Sandager et al., 2005)</td></tr><tr><td>Boophone disticha (L.f.) Herb. Syn: B. longepedicellata Pax</td><td rowspan="2">Weak decotions of bulb scales given to sedte violent, pschotic patients (Van Wy and Gericke, 2). Tadition healers  t indcain r ivit ci  a n i isolated from Boophone disticha exhibited affinity to the serotonin transporter (SERT) protein (Sandager t al., 2005)</td></tr><tr><td>Incotho, incwadi (Z)</td></tr><tr><td>Crinum species umduze (Z)</td><td>Cherylline as isolated fo Crium orei orsh t al, 21 and shoed good afinity to the serotonin transporter ERT) unidentifed pecies is reported to be used in a similar maner asBophone disticha for inducing hallucinations Sobieci, 2002)</td></tr><tr><td>C. bulbispermum (Burm.f.) Milne-Redh. & Schweick.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>C. macowanii Baker Syn: C. gouwsi Traub, C. macowanii Baker subsp. confusum I.Verd.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>C. moorei Hook.f. C. imbricatum Baker, C. macowanii Baker, C. schmidti Regel</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Pancratium tenuifolium Hochst. ex A.Rich Syn: Chapmanolirion juttae Dinter, P.</td><td>Reportedly used by San in Botana to induce halucinations by rubing the bub int incisions on te head Dobkin DeRios, 1986)</td></tr><tr><td>chapmannii Harv. Scadoxus puniceus (L.) Fris & Nordal Syn: Haemanthus magnificus Herb.,</td><td>Known to cause CNS excitation or depression and visual disturbances (Veale et al., 1992)</td></tr><tr><td>Haemanthus natalensis Pappe ex Hook., Haemanthus puniceus L. var. puniceus</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Anacardiaceae Searsia chirindensis (Baker f.) Moffett</td><td>Bark s used to stengthen the body, stiulate circulation and for heuatis (Pujol, 10), ark decotions are traditionalli Transkei (Hutchings et al., 1996)</td></tr><tr><td>Syn: Rhus chirindensis Bak. f.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Asclepiadaceae Gomphocarpus physocarpus E. Mey Stapelia gigantea N.E. Br.</td><td>Leaves used to 'strengthen body'(Pujol, 1990), powdered leaf is used as sedative (van Wyk and Gericke, 2000) Hot stem infusions ar adinistered by Zulu healers as emetics o reat hysteria(ryant, 166)An unidentifed plant calld uzilil</td></tr><tr><td>Syn: S. cyclista C.A.Lickh., S. gigantea</td><td>Hueia ystrix, s e y ul to at entaisordersats aptey u eed oprara meicine capabofa have been reported (Watt and Breyer-Brandwijk, 1962)</td></tr><tr><td>N.E.Br. var. pallida E.Phillips, S. marlothii N.E.Br., S. nobilis N.E.Br., S.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>youngii N.E.Br. Ililo elikhulu (Z)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>lilo (n) lamentation, khulu (adj) large</td><td>Root adinistee in the Tan by Xhoaot heriautchin,). Roots ntin sever coid ndxt</td></tr><tr><td>Xysmalobium undulatum (L.) Aiton.f.</td><td>antidepressant ctivity (Hutchins et al, 1996). Leaf extracts exhibited SSRI (antidepressant) activity Nielsen et al. 2004)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Asphodelaceae</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Decoctions are taken by gups of ul en and adolescents as emetics i purication ites aimed at prventing nti-scial eha</td></tr><tr><td>Bulbine latifolia (L. f.) Roem. & Schult.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>ibhucu (Z)</td><td>underground organs (tubers) to make decotions used o treat convulsions in children (Broster, 181; Pujol, 19). The root is boile</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>infusion taken in small doses twice daily, two teaspoons for convulsions (Pujol, 1990)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td>Capparaceae Capparis tomentosa Lam.</td><td>A </td></tr><tr><td></td><td>tatent fs  ,ch e is nt  house and let it soak for several days and then the whole family will take two cups of this mixture per day</td></tr><tr><td>Crassulaceae Kalanchoe brachyloba Welw. ex Britten</td><td>T  the t  y fe o i t l -</td></tr><tr><td>Cunoniaceae Cunonia capensis L. Umaphethu, umhlahlane, umuthi wokuzila</td><td>The Zulu regard this plant as a strengthening medicine that is taken after the death of a kraal member (Gerstner, 1939)</td></tr><tr><td>Euphorbiaceae Croton sylvaticus Hoscht. Umzilanyoni (Z) zila (um-, imi− (n) rack; nyoni (n) bird, lightning (column of</td><td>Bak </td></tr><tr><td>birds?) Fabaceae Millettia grandis (E.Mey.) Skeels</td><td>T tui</td></tr><tr><td>Schotia brachypetala Sond. Ihlusi, ihluze, umgxamu, uvovovo</td><td>licked from fingers to induce sleep (Palmer and Pitman, 1972)</td></tr><tr><td>Flacourtiaceae</td><td>rites after the death of a relative. They are also used to strengthen the body and to steam the face (Pujol, 1990)</td></tr><tr><td>Gerrardina foliosa Oliv. Fumariaceae</td><td>Strengthening medicine made of unspecif ed parts is taken after the death of a kraal member (Gerstner, 1941)</td></tr><tr><td>Cysticapnos pruinosa (Bernh.) Liden</td><td>Unspecifed parts are used to comfort and drug morning, sorrowful people in Lesotho (Jacot Guillarmod, 1971)</td></tr><tr><td>Iridaceae Belamcanda chinensis (L.) DC.*</td><td>Roots are reported used by the Zulu to ally hysterical crying (Bryant, 1966).</td></tr><tr><td>indawoluthi emnyama (Z) Gladiolus papilio Hook. f.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Ibutha, igulusha (Z)</td><td>Root infusions taken by the Zulu as emetics to bring good fortune (Hulme, 1954)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Lauraceae</td><td>Unspecifi ed parts used as an emetic for emotional and nervous disorders in South Africa (Pujol, 1990)</td></tr><tr><td>Ocotea bullata (Burch.) Baill.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>unukani (Z)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>nuka (n) smell, strong odour</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Loganiaceae (Buddlejaceae and Strychnaceae)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Nuxia floribunda Benth.</td><td>Ba s iiiie . </td></tr><tr><td>Syn: Lachnopylis floribunda (Benth.)</td><td>convulsions and in rituals in unspecif ed parts of Africa (Iwu, 1993)</td></tr><tr><td>C.A.Sm.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Malvaceae</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Malva parviflora L.</td><td>Thotviv.  </td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>(Watt and Breyer-Brandwijk, 1962)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Thespesia acutiloba (Bak. f.) Exell &</td><td>The roots are used in baths taken to refresh the body and dispel troublesome spirits by the Zulu (Palmer and Pitman, 1972)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Mendonca</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 2 (Continued )   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Family Species</td><td>Traditional use, ethnobotanical information and known active constituents</td></tr><tr><td>Colloquial name – meaning1</td></tr><tr><td>Meliaceae Ekebergia capensis Sparrm. Umnyamathi (Z) nyama (n) darkness, ill omen –thi (n) tree, medicine, stick, poison</td><td>Lave a uaahi r nis is  t s stn  af i t inNaal protect chiefs against witchcraft and is also taken in love charm emetics (Gerstner, 1941)</td></tr><tr><td>Turraea floribunda Hochst. umadlozana (Z) dlozane (isi, izi-) (n) nape of the neck, dlozi (i-, ama-) (n) spirit of the departed, guardian spirit, ancestral spirit</td><td>Rots aivis r foviiWa,  t akraal eer Gerster 11) Reporte tobe poisnus if verdoses  aken, unts not pecifed Wat and reyer-Branwi, 1962)</td></tr><tr><td>Mesembryanthemaceae Mesembryanthemum species Ikhambi-lamabulawo (Z) bulawo (n) body weakness as a result</td><td>Eetics f iirinis rease acf although the name suggests there is witchcraft involved</td></tr><tr><td>of witchcraft Sceletium species Sceletium emarcidum (Thunb.) L.Bolus ex H.Jacobsen Syn: Mesembryanthemum anatomicum</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Haw. var. anatomicum, Mesembryanthemum anatomicum Haw. var. emarcidum (Thunb.)DC., Mesembryanthemum anatomicum Haw. var. fragile Haw., Mesembryanthemum</td><td>  w int  s snuff (Smith et al., 1996, 1998; van Wyk and Gericke, 2000)</td></tr><tr><td>emarcidum Thunb., S. anatomicum (Haw.) L.Bolus, S. dejagerae L.Bolus, Tetracoilanthus anatomicus (Haw.) Rappa & Camarrone Sceletium tortuosum (L.) N.E. Br. Syn: Mesembryanthemum concavum Haw., Mesembryanthemum tortuosum L., Pentacoilanthus tortuosus (L.) Rappa</td><td>Slt is  al e i tet T</td></tr><tr><td>& Camarrone, Phyllobolus tortuosus (L.) Bittrich, S. boreale L.Bolus, S. compactum L.Bolus, S. concavum (Haw.) Schwantes, S. framesii L.Bolus, S. gracile L.Bolus, S. jouberti L.Bolus, S. namaquense L.Bolus var. namaquense, S. namaquense L.Bolus var.</td><td>obsessive-compulsive disorders (Gericke and Van Wyk, 2001)</td></tr><tr><td>subglobosum L.Bolus, S. ovatum L.Bolus, S. tugwelliae L.Bolus Kougoed (A) – chewing substance</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Myrsinaceae Maesa lanceolata Forssk. Umaguqu (Z) Uphophopho (Z)</td><td>Bark is a ig ta fastaa, h   A</td></tr></table></body></html>

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="2">Oleaceae</td></tr><tr><td>Olea woodiana Knobl. Isadlulambazo, umhlwazimamba, umnqumo (Z)</td><td>stimulate the appetite and the leaves are also used for their stimulating properties (Pujol, 1990)</td></tr><tr><td>Orchidaceae Ansellia africana LindI. Imfe-nkawu (Z)</td><td>are used to make an inusion for in Zimbabwe (Gelfand et al., 1985)</td></tr><tr><td>Passifloraceae Adenia gummifera (Harv.) Harms Imfulwa (Z), Impinda (Z) (n) a recurrence</td><td>or depression caused by a febrile conditions I nown as umkhuhlane (common cold or fever) to the Zulu (Bryant, 166). The Shona of imbawe reportedly use root infusions to treat madness and epilepsy (Gelfand et al., 1985)</td></tr><tr><td>Poaceae Cymbopogon nardus (L.) Rendle Syn: C. afronardus Stapf, C. validus (Stapf) Stapf ex Burtt Davy validus (Stapf.) Stapf. ex Burtt. Davy Isicunge (Z)</td><td>reported to be used to reduce the appetite and revitalise the nerves of moody people (Hutchings et al, 1996)</td></tr><tr><td>Polygalaceae Nylandtia spinosa (L.) Dumort. Syn: Mundia spinosa (L.) DC.</td><td>narcotic (Kling, 1923)</td></tr><tr><td>Rutaceae Clausena anisata (Willd.) Hook. f. ex Benth.</td><td>Zulu in an emetic for illness believed to be inflicted by evil spirits or by the ancestors Hutchings et al., 1996)</td></tr><tr><td>Sapotaceae Sideroxylon inerme L. AmaSethole (-amhlophe)</td><td>Emetics made from unspecified parts are taken to dispel bad dreams (Watt and Breyer-Brandwijk, 1962)</td></tr><tr><td>Vitellariopsis marginata (N.E. Br.) AmaSethole</td><td> and sexual stimulants (Hutchings et al., 1996). Root infusions are taken twice</td></tr></table></body></html>

1(A): Afrikaans, (Z): Zulu; \* non-indigenous species.

# 2. Plants used for mental health ailments

Traditional healers in South Africa make use of a plethora of plants. Nearly 150 plant species from 63 families are used for the indications epilepsy and convulsions (Table 1), possibly reflecting the severity of this problem in the population. The families most often represented are Fabaceae (15 species), Asteraceae (13 species) and Lamiaceae (9 species) (Table 1). Over 40 plant species are used for ailments that could be described as depression (Table 2). These plants come from 26 different families. The number of plants used for dementia and age-related mental problems are lower with only 15 species from 7 families recorded (Table 3), which could be due to a previous demographic situation, where traditional healers less frequently had very old patients. Amaryllidaceae is the best-represented family with six species (Table 3). Mental health problems constitute a serious problem in southern Africa. Not surprisingly, a large number, well over 300 species, of plants are used by traditional healers in their treatment of these ailments (Sobiecki, 2002).

# 3. Plants used for convulsions and epilepsy

# 3.1. Epilepsy in southern Africa

The prevalence of epilepsy in developing countries is generally higher than in developed countries (Sander and Shorvon, 1996). A recent study reports an increased risk of dying and a greater proportion of deaths that are epilepsy-related in Africa – as high as a six-fold increase in mortality in people with epilepsy. This is higher than the two- to three-fold increase reported in developed countries (Christianson et al., 2000; Diop et al., 2005). The reasons for this gap between the developed and the developing countries are not entirely clear but suggestions have been made that it might be due to social deprivation (Sander, 2003). Interestingly, recent data suggest that people from socio-economically deprived backgrounds in developed countries are more likely to develop epilepsy (Heaney et al., 2002). A study from 2000 on the prevalence of epilepsy in a large rural community situated in the Northern Province in South Africa showed a lifetime prevalence in children as high as 73/1000 (Christianson et al., 2000).

Some infectious diseases might be a part of the explanation. Neurocysticercosis caused by Taenia solium (pork tapeworm) infections may trigger epileptic outburst (Garcia et al., 2003; DeGiorgio et al., 2005). A study on 578 epileptic patients in Pretoria showed neurocysticercosis in 28% of the patients (van As and Joubert, 1991). HIV infection of the CNS or opportunistic infections caused by HIV might also trigger epileptic seizures (Garg, 1999; Visudtibhan et al., 1999). With an estimated 5.5 million HIV positives in South Africa at the end of 2006 with a prevalence of 39% in the KwaZulu-Natal province this is an alarming scenario (UNAIDS, 2006, 2007).

Epilepsy is often viewed with a certain degree of fear and risk of contagious effect due to the cultural attitudes and beliefs in South Africa. Studies conducted in townships showed that the parents of epileptic children believe that the disorder is caused by various parameters including bewitchment, fear or evil spirits (Eastman, 2005). It is viewed as a shameful disorder and has severe social implications in African communities as it carries a stigma. Sufferers are often shunned and discriminated against with respect to education, employment and marriage (Andermann, 1995; Baskind and Birbeck, 2005).

This cultural influence is also prominent in the treatment of the disorder where many people seek treatment by traditional healers and traditional medicine. A survey in 2000 showed, that 42.5% of epileptic children received traditional medicine alone or together with Western medicine whereas 34.6% received no treatment at all (Christianson et al., 2000).

# 3.2. Studies on plants used to treat convulsions and epilepsy in South Africa

Numerous plants used in the traditional South African medicine have been screened for compounds with affinity to the flumazenil-sensitive benzodiazepine modulatory sites on the GABA (-aminobutyric acid) subtype A receptor. Initially, the aqueous and ethanol extracts of 43 South African medicinal plants traditionally used to treat epilepsy and convulsions were tested in the GABAA-benzodiazepine receptor-binding assay (Risa et al., 2004a).

In a second study, 46 ethanol extracts from 35 species both indigenous and exotic that are traditionally used predominantly as sedatives or to treat various CNS-related ailments were tested in the GABAA-benzodiazepine receptor-binding assay (Stafford et al., 2005). These investigations led to the screening, isolation and identification of the flavonoids apigenin, amentoflavone and agathisflavone as the active compounds from Searsia F.A. Barkley (basionym: Rhus) species (Anacardiaceae) (Svenningsen et al., 2006) and viridiflorol and (S)-naringenin from Mentha aquatica L. (Lamiaceae) (Jäger et al., 2007).

The binding of apigenin and amentoflavone to the flumazenil site has previously been reported (Nielsen et al., 1988; Viola et al., 1995) but apigenin showed no anticonvulsant properties in vivo (Viola et al., 1995; Avallone et al., 2000). Another group reported amentoflavone to be a relatively weak negative allosteric modulator of GABA action acting independently the flumazenil binding site (Hanrahan et al., 2003). Thus, the use of these plants as anticonvulsive agents suggests involvement of a different neurotransmitter system. Further functional characterization of the Searsia extracts showed inhibitory effects on spontaneous epileptiform discharges in mouse cortical slices (Pedersen et al., 2008). Interestingly, the effect was not caused by the previous isolated flavonoids. The extracts contained N-methyl-d-aspartic acid (NMDA) receptor antagonists, which might explain the effect of the plants reported by the traditional healers. However, these findings need be confirmed by in vivo anticonvulsive studies before any conclusions can be made.

A number of southern African plants have shown in vivo anticonvulsant activity against seizures produced in mice by pentylenetetrazole (PTZ), picrotoxin (PIC), bicuculline (BIC) and NMDA. However, most of the studies have been conducted on plant extracts and the active constituents are yet to be identified. Recently, Ojewole (2008c) reported on the anticonvulsant effect of Searsia chirindensis (Baker f.) Moffett (syn = Rhus chirindensis Baker f.) stem-bark aqueous extract in mice. Searsia chirindensis stembark aqueous extract (100–800 mg/kg i.p.) significantly delayed the onset of, and antagonized PTZ induced seizures. The extract (100–800 mg/kg i.p.) also profoundly antagonized PIC induced seizures, but only weakly antagonized BIC induced seizures. Risa et al. (2004a) showed that the aqueous and ethanolic extracts of the leaves and roots of Searsia chirindensis showed very weak GABAAbenzodiazepine receptor binding compared to other Searsia species tested (Risa et al., 2004a, Svenningsen et al., 2006) suggesting a different mechanism of action than the classical benzodiazepines.

Ojewole et al. conducted several in vivo studies on extracts from South African medicinal plants including the fruit of Tetrapleura tetraptera (Schum.et Thonn.) Taub. (Fabaceae) (Ojewole, 2005), avocado leaf (Persea americana Mill. (Lauraceae)), (Ojewole and Amabeoku, 2006), Harpagophytum procumbens D.C. ex Meisn. (Pedaliaceae) roots (Mahomed and Ojewole, 2006), Sutherlandia frutescens (L.) R.Br. (variety Incana E.Mey.) (Fabaceae) shoots (Ojewole, 2008a) and Hypoxis hemerocallidea Fisch.Mey. & Ave-Lall.

U

Table 3 Southern African plants traditionally used for age-related dementia and memory loss   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Family Species</td><td>Traditional use, ethnobotanical information and known active constituents</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Colloquial name – meaning1</td></tr><tr><td>Alliaceae Agapanthus africanus (Agapanthaceae)</td><td>A decoction of Agapanthus africanus and other unspecifi ed herbs are used by Southern So</td></tr><tr><td>Syn: A. minor Lodd.,A. umbellatus L'Hér., Crinum africanum L., Mauhlia africana (L.)</td><td>(Walker, 1996)</td></tr><tr><td>Dahl, Mauhlia linearis Thunb, Tulbaghia heisteri Fabric Ubane(-oluncane), uhlakahla (Z)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td>Amaryllidaceae Ammocharis coranica (Ker-Gawl.) Herb.</td><td>Used to treat serious afflictions (unspecifi ed) caused by witchcraft (Hulme, 1954). Knowi</td></tr><tr><td>Boophone disticha (L.f.) Herb. Syn: B. longepedicellata Pax</td><td>transporter (SERT) protein (Sandager et al., 2005) Weak decoctions of bulb scales given to sedate violent, psychotic patents (van Wyk and G induce hallucinations for divinatory purposes, and also as a medicine to treat mental illn</td></tr><tr><td>Incotho, incwadi (Z) Crinum species</td><td>Cherylline was isolated from Crinum moorei (Elgorashi et al., 2001) and showed good affi. unidentified species is reported to be used in a similar manner as Boophone disticha for in</td></tr><tr><td>Umduze (Z) C. bulbispermum (Burm.f.) Milne-Redh. & Schweick.</td><td>South African Crinum species were tested by Elgorashi et al. (2004). Lycorine-type alkaloi ICso of 0.96 mM which was more potent than galanthamine (ICso = 1.9 mM, positive contr were 100 times less active</td></tr><tr><td>C. macowanii Baker Syn: C. gouwsi Traub, C. macowani Baker subsp. confusum I.Verd.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>C. moorei Hook.f. C. imbricatum Baker, C. macowani Baker, C. schmidti Regel</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Scadoxus multiflorus (Martyn) Raf. Syn: Haemanthus katharinae Baker,</td><td>Reported to contain galanthamine (O.002%) an AChE inhibitor (Jaspersen-Schib, 1970)</td></tr><tr><td>Haemanthus multiflorus Martyn, Haemanthus otaviensis Dinter, Haemanthus sacculus E.Phillips</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Anacardiaceae Lannea schweinfurthi (Engl.) Engl.</td><td>The Vhavenda traditionally used decoctions made from root bark mixed with a fungus fo relative (Mabogo, 1990). They are also used as a protection against a sleeping sickness kn</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>covered with a dense layer of very fi ne root hairs, that are reportedly used as a sedative s Gericke, 2000)</td></tr><tr><td>Annonaceae Annona senegalensis Pers.</td><td>The roots are mixed with Trema orientalis to treat madness; roots are used to treat madne</td></tr><tr><td>Syn: A. arenaria Thonn. ex Schumach., A.</td><td>facilitating weaning processes (Palmer and Pitman, 1972). The Vhavenda use roots for sn:</td></tr><tr><td>chrysophylla Bojer Apiaceae</td><td>as protective charms against witchcraft (Mabogo, 1990). An Annona sp. is used in Ghana Dried powdered leaves are used by unspecifi ed groups as a snuff, which reportedly prod</td></tr><tr><td>Centella asiatica (L.) Urb.*</td><td>given with milk to improve memory against dementia and aging (Mukharji, 1953). Const</td></tr><tr><td>Asparagaceae</td><td>brahmoside and thankuniside, alkaloids (hydrocotyline) and some bitter principles (Chev</td></tr><tr><td>Asparagus africanus Lam.</td><td>In South Africa leaves, stems and roots are pounded and soaked in water to make an infu</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Syn: Protasparagus africanus (Lam.) Oberm.disturbance(Kokwaro, 1976) The plant contains steroidal saponins and Iignans(Debella</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>A. concinnus (Baker) Kies</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Syn: A. africanus Lam. var. concinnus Baker</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

Ci )

T nakebites, venereal diseases, diarrhoea, dysentery, blood in the faeces, headaches and as a snuff, which reportedly produces a calming, sedative efect (van Wyk and Gericke, 2000). In parts of India it is nst dementiandgin Muar, 5). Constitent inC. siatica includeesentiai, titeenid aponin, ch as asiaticci

(Hypoxidaceae; Syn = Hypoxis rooperii T. Moore) corms (misleadingly called the ‘African Potato’) (Ojewole, 2008b). All these studies shared the interesting fact that the aqueous extracts of these various plants delayed and antagonized the onset of PTZ and PIC induced seizures while the effect on BIC induced seizures was weaker and only present in high doses. When tested in the flumazenil-binding assay, extracts of Hypoxis hemerocallidea showed no effect, thus suggesting a different mechanism of action than the classical benzodiazepines (Risa et al., 2004a).

Another study investigated a Northern Sotho remedy, Sehlare sa Seebana, for treatment of epilepsy (Jäger et al., 2005). The recipe for this herbal remedy contains six plants, Acrotome inflata Benth. (Lamiaceae), Aptosimum indivisum Burch. ex Benth. (Scrophulariaceae), Asparagus suaveolens Burch. (Syn. = Protasparagus suaveolens (Burch.) Oberm.; Asparagaceae), Barleria bolusii Oberm. (Acanthaceae), Commiphora marlothii Engl. (Burseraceae) and Sesamum triphyllum Welw. ex Asch. (Pedaliaceae). Equal parts of the plants are placed in a red-hot clay pot and the patient inhales the smoke. Both aqueous and ethanol extracts of Aptosimum indivisum and Asparagus suaveolens and the aqueous extract of Commiphora marlothii showed dose-dependent GABAA-benzodiazepine receptor binding. Most of the plants have not been chemically investigated. Three metabolites: verbascoside, pinocembrinin 7- neohesperidoside and shanzhiside methyl ester were isolated from Aptosimum indivisum. Barleria bolusii contains verbascoside, which is known to inhibit the GABA receptors, but did not show activity (Daels-Rakotoarison et al., 2000; Jäger et al., 2005). Verbascoside was also isolated from Craterocapsa tarsodes Hilliard and B.L. Burtt (Campanulaceae) – another plant used in Northern Sotho traditional medicine for treatment of epilepsy (van Heerden et al., 2002).

Several Amaryllidaceae alkaloids isolated from Crinum L. species were screened for potential activity in the GABAA-benzodiazepine binding assay (Elgorashi et al., 2006a). However, none of the tested alkaloids displayed any affinity to the binding site.

Watt (1967), one of the earliest researchers to recognize the potential of African plants in improving mental health, reported the use of Cotyledon orbiculata L. (Crassulaceae; subspecies not specified) leaves to treat epilepsy. Studies have demonstrated that both aqueous and methanol extracts of Cotyledon orbiculata have anticonvulsant properties in vivo (moderate protection against PTZ, BIC, PIC and NMDA induced seizures in mice) (Amabeoku et al., 2007). A recent study of the ethanolic extract, however, did not show in vitro GABAA-benzodiazepine receptor binding activity (Stafford et al., 2005) suggesting another mechanism of action.

Another plant investigated for potential anticonvulsive effects is Leonotis leonurus (L.) R.Br. (Lamiaceae) (Bienvenu et al., 2002), which was reported to have narcotic effects and is used as a substitute for Cannabis L. (Watt and Breyer-Brandwijk, 1962). The aqueous extracts of Leonotis leonurus (400 mg/kg) protected against or delayed seizures induced by PTZ, PIC and NMDA, but did not protect against BIC-induced seizures. In this study, the ethanol extracts of the three species of Leonotis (Pers.) R.Br. had weak GABAA-benzodiazepine receptor binding activity only at the highest concentration tested (10 mg/ml) (Risa et al., 2004a). The aqueous extracts however were not active, suggesting that the anticonvulsant mechanism is not via GABAA-benzodiazepine receptor. The ethyl acetate fraction of Centella asiatica (L.) Urb. (Apiaceae) increased the effect of the i.p. administrated antiepileptic drugs phenytoin, valproate and gabapentin (Vattanajun et al., 2005) and decreased the PTZ-kindled induced seizures in rats (Gupta et al., 2003). This effect might be due to an increase in GABA levels caused by the extract as reported by Chatterjee et al. (1992). The neuroprotective properties of the plant in monosodium glutamate treated rats were investigated by Ramanathan et al. (2007). The general behavior, locomotor activity and the CA1 region of the hippocampus

was protected by Centella asiatica. The levels of catalase, superoxide dismutase and lipid peroidase in the hippocampus and striatum were improved indicating a neuroprotective property of the extract.

Very few studies have been conducted on the antiepileptogenic effect of plant extracts. Peredery and Persinger (2004) demonstrated a possible antiepileptogenic effect of a weak solution of Datura stramonium L. (Solanaceae), Gelsemium sempervirens L. (Loganiaceae) Scutellaria lateri flora continuously administrated after lithium pilocarpin induced SE in rats. Interestingly, after removal of extract administration the animals displayed numbers of spontaneous seizures comparable to control group. Another group investigated the antiepileptogenic effect of Acorus calamus L. (Araceae) in ferric chloride-induced epileptgenesis in rats (Hazra et al., 2007). Pretreatment with ethanolic extract of Acorus calamus (200 mg/kg p.o. for 14 days) decreased the wet dog shake behavior (a distinct epileptic behavior) in rats and decreased the spike wave discharges in EEG recordings. The effect was comparable to diazepam 20 mg/kg. Also, a significant decrease in superoxide dismutase and level of peroxidation was observed, which confirmed the findings in a previous study (Tang et al., 2005).

Extensive studies have been conducted on the non-indigenous plant Withania somnifera (L.) Dun (Solanaceae). The plant grows in South Africa and might be imported by Asian immigrants. The many reported CNS effects include antiepileptic, anxiolytic, memory enhancing and antiparkinsonian properties. It has profound CNS depressant actions and it has been shown to possess anticonvulsant properties in acute and chronic models of epilepsy. Binding assays and functional assays indicated that the extract of Withania somnifera possessed its anticonvulsant activities through the GABAA receptor system. However, no bioassay-guided isolation has yet determined the active compound(s) (Kulkarni and Dhir, 2008).

# 3.3. Conclusions

This review illustrates the difficulties of studying medicinal plants in assays for convulsions and epilepsy. The variety of effects, the lack of selectivity, the need for functional assays and the mismatch between in vitro and in vivo findings make it at challenging task to examine these plants for potential new anti-epileptic drugs. So far, very few compounds have been isolated and characterized. Most of the studies are conduced on extracts and the mechanism of action might involve several different neurotransmitter systems. When used by the traditional healers, the medicinal plants are often combined thus increasing the potential number of neuroactive compounds in the pool of ingredients making the identification of active components very difficult.

# 4. Plants used for depression

# 4.1. Depression in South Africa

Depressive disorders, including major depression and dysthymia, are significant and disabling illnesses. It is estimated that one in five individuals is affected by a mood disorder in his or her lifetime. The World Health Organization estimates that major depression is the fourth most important cause worldwide of loss in disability-adjusted life years, and will be the second most important cause by 2020 (Murray and Lopez, 1996). Depression affects an estimated 121 million people worldwide.

In South Africa in 1990, the overall suicide rate was 17.2 per 100,000, which is slightly higher than that in the WHO report (2001). Initial estimates from the South African National Burden of Disease Study (2000) indicated suicide as the 11th out of 20 leading causes of mortality (Bradshaw et al., 2003). South Africa has a history of traumatized citizens and is a society in transition. Suicidal behavior among the black population in South Africa has appeared to be on the increase (Lourens and Naseema, 1998). South African, black youth do not only increasingly consider suicide as an option when they cannot cope, but act on it in certain cases as well – especially when they are under severe depression (Meel, 2003). Depressive symptoms (64%) are highly prevalent immediately before suicide (Heila et al., 1997).

South Africa is in a HIV/AIDS epidemic of shattering dimensions (Dorrington et al., 2001). At the turn of the Millennium about 200,000 had died of AIDS-related illnesses and about five million were estimated to be infected (Harber, 2002). Depression in HIV-positive individuals is significantly higher, although depressive symptoms may not be strong enough to warrant a psychiatric diagnosis (Fukunishi et al., 1997). Depressive symptoms and suicidal ideation are common among HIV-positive patients, occurring at comparable or greater rates than those found in a variety of other medically ill populations (Judd and Mijch, 1996). In South Africa, as is the case in most Third World countries, there is a serious limitation for this care as treatment for severe mental disorders is not available in most primary health care settings.

The ailment of depression is not recognized in traditional practice. However, a number of other states and conditions with symptoms similar to depression are known, for example the condition ‘being put down’ by the ancestors. Persons inflicted with curses and evil spirits have symptoms that often resemble a depressed state accompanied by lethargy. The incongruence between indigenous and western disease nomenclature makes it more difficult to evaluate the use of plants in a western scientific paradigm.

# 4.2. Studies on plants used to treat depression in South Africa

Seventy five extracts from 34 indigenous plant species used in South African traditional medicine or taxonomically related to these were investigated for their affinity for the serotonin reuptake transport protein, making use of an in vitro SERT binding assay (Nielsen et al., 2004). Five plant species with high affinity were identified; they were Agapanthus campanulatus F.M. Leight, Boophone disticha (L.f.) Herb., Datura ferox L. (exotic species), Mondia whitei (Hook.f.) Skeels and Xysmalobium undulatum (L.) Aiton f.

Ethanolic extracts from Agapanthus campanulatus, Boophone disticha, Mondia whitei and Xysmalobium undulatum were screened for functional inhibition of SERT, noradrenalin uptake (NAT) and dopamine uptake (DAT) using COS-7 cells expressing hSERT, hNAT or hDAT (Pedersen et al., 2008). Extracts from Agapanthus campanulatus, Boophone disticha and Mondia whitei showed an effect in the functional assays. Ethanolic extracts from Agapanthus campanulatus, Boophone disticha, Mondia whitei and Xysmalobium undulatum, were investigated for in vivo antidepressant-like effects in three animal models for depression (Pedersen et al., 2008). The assays employed were forced swim test in both mice and rats and the tail suspension test in mice. All four extracts exhibited antidepressantlike effects in the animal models in various degrees.

Bioassay-guided fractionations of Boophone disticha (Amaryllidaceae) lead to the isolation and identification of two alkaloids, buphanadrine and buphanamine with affinity for SERT (Sandager et al., 2005). Structurally, buphanamine and buphanadrine have the benzo-1,3-dioxole moiety in common with the clinically used SSRI paroxetin, which could explain their affinity to the SERT. The traditional use and reported hallucinogenic effects obtained after accidental or purposeful overdosing with Boophone disticha extracts (De Smet, 1996; van Wyk et al., 2002) indicate that the alkaloids reach the CNS.

The activity of these alkaloids inspired further screening of several Amaryllidaceae alkaloids in the SERT binding assay (Elgorashi et al., 2006a). Several Amaryllidaceae alkaloids exhibited high affinity for SERT. Cherylline showed the highest activity (IC50 = 3.4 M) in the [3H]-citalopram binding assay. Cherylline shares some structural similarities to sertraline and 4-(indol-3- yl)piperidine type SSRIs, which could explain the high affinity of the compound. Epivittatine (IC50 = 12.1 M), powelline and martidine (IC50 ∼20 M) showed good activity. Epibuphanisine and O-methylmartidine showed moderate activity (IC50 = 78 M and IC50 = 40 M, respectively).

Sceletium tortuosum (L.) N.E.Br. has been used as a moodaltering substance from prehistoric times by pastoralists and hunter-gatherers in southern Africa (Gericke and Van Wyk, 2001). It contains the alkaloid mesembrine, which acts as a serotonin reuptake inhibitor (Gericke and Van Wyk, 2001). Sceletium tortuosum has been developed into a commercial product, which is sold for treatment of mild depressions and for elevation of the consumer’s mood.

# 4.3. Conclusions

The screening programme for plants with inhibitory activity on the SERT leads to identification of five plants with promising activity. Four of these plants were further investigated in animal models for depression, where they showed activity in various degrees. From one of the plants Boophone disticha, the active constituents, Amaryllidaceae alkaloids, have been isolated. Further investigations are required to establish the safety and clinical efficacy of the plant extracts.

# 5. Plants used for age-related dementia and debilitative mental disorders

# 5.1. Age-related dementia and debilitative mental disorders in southern Africa

The increasing average life expectancy is leading to major demographic changes worldwide. CNS disorders associated with old age, such as Alzheimer’s (AD) and Parkinson’s disease (PD), and other ‘senile’ dementia will have dramatic societal and economic impact in the next decades (World Health Report, 1998). The number of elderly people in Africa is increasing very rapidly. Figures from the UN Project Life expectancy in Africa to increase from under 40 years in 1950 to almost 60 years in 2010 (Ineichen, 2000), however, due to HIV life expectancy in southern Africa, which reached 59 years in the early 1990s, is expected to fall to 45 years by 2010. In South Africa life expectancy was 45 years (1950–1955) and rose to currently around 58 years (1995–2000) but is expected to drop again over the next decade to 56 years (United Nations, 2003).

The HIV epidemic is further complicated by the development of a subcortical dementing illness known as AIDS dementia complex (ADC) (Guillemin and Brew, 2007). Highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) has effectively lengthened HIV infected patients’ life expectancy; indeed some are approaching an age where the risk of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is starting to become significant. Furthermore, many such patients have hyperlipidemia, which increases the risk of AD. Consequently, it has been predicted, by Guillemin and Brew (2007) that HIV infected patients are at an increased risk of AD or ADC.

Out of the approximately 100 studies of the prevalence of dementia that have been carried out worldwide, only a small number have been conducted in Africa (Ineichen, 1998, 2000). In fact very few studies have taken place in developing countries, despite the fact that by 2025, an estimated 68% of the world’s elderly will be living in them (Chandra et al., 1994). Hardly any epidemiological studies of mental illness in Africa have centered on dementia, or indeed on more general psychogeriatric problems.

There are relatively a small number of reported African herbal treatments for age-related CNS disorders (Adams et al., 2007; Neuwinger, 2000). Perhaps the lower life expectancy in Africa, presently and particularly in the past, might explain why there are only a few traditional treatments for age-related illnesses. Many of the plants used to treat age-related brain disorders throughout the world are reviewed by Adams et al. (2007). Thirteen African plants are reported to be used in the context of age-related CNS disorders (Adams et al., 2007).

# 5.2. Alzheimer’s disease

In the absence of any disease (e.g. AD, hardening of arteries in the brain) a person’s mental abilities are expected to remain largely intact throughout their life. Alzheimer’s disease is by far the most frequent cause of dementia, increasing in prevalence from less than 1% below the age of 60 to more than 40% above the age of 85 (Lindeboom and Weinstein, 2004). Alzheimer’s disease is a chronic, progressive, neurodegenerative disorder of the brain characterized clinically by deterioration in the key symptoms of activities of daily living, behavior, and cognition.

The prevalence of AD among indigenous South African subjects is not known. Local neurologists and old-age psychiatrists rarely encounter the disorder (De Villiers and Louw, 1996). Cultural attitudes in Africa surrounding dementia may have contributed to this apparent low prevalence. One suggestion is that dementia sufferers may not survive for long. They may die quickly, from conditions such as pneumonia or diarrhoea due to the decreasing status of the olderly in the developing world (Chandra et al., 1994; Levkoff et al., 1995). Another explanation is that dementia, like other kinds of mental illness, remains a stigmatised condition, and as such may be hidden from researchers (Ineichen, 2000). Given that rural communities still have difficulties in accessing tertiary health care and that memory impairment may be accepted as part of normal ageing, patients do not readily interface with clinicians (De Villiers and Louw, 1996). The demented may not even be seen as ill (De Villiers and Louw, 1996). Among the Tuareg of Niger, senility is believed to be a possible consequence of an old person neglecting her duty of regular prayer (Rasmussen, 1997). Ihezue and Okpara (1989) consider that mental illness is thought of as ‘African’ and indigenous traditional healers might be more likely to be consulted than Western-trained doctors.

The cholinergic hypothesis states that the cognitive decline in AD is secondary to deficits in central cholinergic neurotransmission resulting from a loss of acetylcholine (ACh) (Weinstock, 1999). Of the various possible strategies for enhancing cholinergic activity in the brain, acetylcholinesterase (AChE) inhibition has been by far the most extensively used (Weinstock, 1999). Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors enhance central cholinergic function by inhibiting the enzymes that degrade ACh, thereby increasing the availability of ACh to stimulate nicotinic and muscarinic receptors within the brain. Since their introduction into clinical practice, AChE inhibitors have been, and remain, the standard approach to the symptomatic treatment of AD. In the United States, these agents are the only approved pharmacologic approach shown to be effective in this disease (Grossberg, 2003).

Understanding of the pharmacologic and toxic properties of cholinesterase inhibitors has been available for over a century (Felter and Lloyd, 1898). Perhaps, the earliest records of toxic effects of cholinesterase inhibitors concern the perennial African plant Physostigma venenosum Balf. (Fabaceae). The seeds of this plant, indigenous to Calabar on the coast of Nigeria in West Africa, were used by local people for “trial by ordeal” to determine the guilt or innocence of an accused criminal. The alkaloid, physostigmine, was first isolated from Physostigma venenosum seeds in 1864 by Jobst and Hesse (Lloyd, 1897). When the clinical potential of AChE inhibitors in AD treatment was realized, it was noted that physostigmine was not suitable due to its unfavorable pharmacokinetics, notably its short half-life. Many analogous compounds were synthesized to overcome this and resulted in rivastigmine, which is now marketed by Novartis Pharma AG (Basel, Switzerland) (Grossberg, 2003). Galanthamine, an Amaryllidaceae alkaloid originally isolated from the European snowdrop (Galanthus L. species), is currently marketed as a hydrobromide salt under the name Razadyne®, formerly Reminyl®, for the treatment of AD. For an elegant and comprehensive review of the discovery and development of this drug consult Heinrich and Teoh (2004).

# 5.3. Studies on plants used to treat Alzhiemer’s disease in South Africa

Aqueous and ethanol extracts of five plants used in southern Africa to treat memory loss; Malva parviflora L. (leaves), Boophone disticha (L.f.) Herb. (leaves and bulbs), Albizia adianthifolia (Schumach.) W. Wright (stem bark), Albizia suluensis Gerstner (root bark) and Crinum moorei Hook.f. (bulbs) were investigated for AChE inhibitory activity (Risa et al., 2004b) using an assay on thin layer chromatography (TLC) is also based on Ellman’s reaction (Ellman et al., 1961). Promising results were obtained with Amaryllidaceae bulbs of Boophone disticha and Crinum moorei. Aqueous and ethanol extracts of Crinum moorei and Boophone disticha also showed AChE inhibiting activity in the TLC assay. These findings together with the long acting, selective, reversible, and competitive AChE inhibitory properties of galanthamine led to the search for other AChE inhibitors from the family Amaryllidaceae. Elgorashi et al. (2004) screened 23 Amaryllidaceae alkaloids, belonging to four ring types, which were isolated from Crinum moorei Hook.f., Crinum macowanii Baker, Crinum bulbispermum (Burm.f.) Milne-Redh. & Schweick. and Cyrtanthus falcatus R.A. Dyer for their AChE inhibitory activity using both the assay on TLC and a 96-well microplate assays also derived from Ellman’s method.

Differences in AChE inhibitory activity could be related to structural differences, in particular different ring types. Lycorine-type alkaloids were the most active against AChE with 1-O-acetyllycorine (IC50 = 0.96 M) exhibiting inhibitory activity comparable to that of galanthamine. The inhibitory activity of the alkaloids lycorine and 1,2 di-O-acetyllycorine was 100-times less potent than that of 1-O-acetyllycorine (Elgorashi et al., 2004).

These findings support earlier reports claiming the inhibitory activity of AChE by lycorine-type alkaloids (López et al., 2002). López et al. (2002) suggested that the aromatic ring C that gives a certain planarity to those molecules could explain the higher activity of assoanine and oxoassoanine compared to other lycorinetype alkaloids. Crinum glaucum and Crinum jagus (Amaryllidaceae) have been used in Nigeria by traditional healers for memory loss and other CNS-related ailments associated with aging. Houghton et al. (2004) isolated alkaloids from the plants and tested their AChE inhibitory properties. It is interesting to note that hamayne isolated and assayed by Elgorashi et al. (2004) from Crinum macownii showed an IC50 of 553 M against 250 M for the compound investigated by Houghton et al. (2004). The compounds were tested in a different microplate assays the later according to the method of Perry et al. (2000). The difference between the two studies is also apparent with lycorine (IC50 = 450 M compared to 213 M). It is difficult to compare the two studies as they have used different positive controls (galanthamine IC50 = 1.9 M and physostigmine IC50 = 0.25 M, respectively).

QSAR studies were conducted to uncover the relationship between the AChE inhibitory effects of South African Amaryllidaceae alkaloids and their physicochemical properties using stepwise multiple linear regression analysis (Elgorashi et al., 2006b). The regression analysis based on the physicochemical properties of all the alkaloids shows that strain energy, heat of formation, substituents at ring C and the aromatic ring play significant roles in the AChE inhibitory activity. Good linear regression was obtained when ring-type based models were established for crinine-type and lycorine-type alkaloids. The study also revealed that log P of most of the alkaloids investigated is comparable to that of galanthamine and this would suggest that they could pass through the brain–blood barrier (Elgorashi et al., 2006b).

Alignment of representative alkaloids with galanthamine revealed that the active binding site of 1-O-acetyllycorine might be different from that of galanthamine (Elgorashi et al., 2006b). However, the surface energy potential showed close similarities in charge distribution between 1-O-acetyllycorine and galanthaminetype alkaloids. The predictive potential of the models established in the study is however limited to this class of compounds and the physicochemical parameters investigated.

Several studies have been investigated the memory enhancing effect of Withania somnifera (L.) Dun (Solanaceae) and an extensive review was conducted by Kulkarni and Dhir (2008). The investigations include the isolation of withanoloids, which inhibit AChE and BuChE dose dependently. Treatment with withanolid A also isolated from Withania somnifera induced significant regeneration of axons and dendrites in memory-deficient mice. Withanosid IV isolated from the root induced neurite outgrowth in cultured rat cortical neurons.

The effect of Centella asiatica (L.) Urb. on cognition and memory impairment has been widely studied. Oral administration (200 mg/kg) of Centella asiatica for 15 days dose-dependently enhanced the learning and memory in 3 months old mice as assessed by the radial arm maze test (Rao Sulochana et al., 2005). AChE activity levels in the hippocampus and dendritic arborisation of CA3 pyramidal neurons showed significant increase indicating, that treatment with Centella asiatica extract during the early postnatal developmental stages can produce long lasting beneficial effects on the mouse brain (Rao Sulochana et al., 2005). These findings were supported by improved memory in normal rats after Centella asiatica administration (Veerendra and Gupta, 2002). Yanan et al. (2008) suggest that Centella asiatica mediate its memory enhancement through the ERK/RSK signalling pathway.

# 5.4. Parkinson’s disease

Parkinson’s disease (PD) affects one in every 100 persons above the age of 65 years; it is the second most common neurodegenerative disease after Alzheimer’s disease (De Rijk et al., 2000). It is the most common neurologically based movement disorder, clinically diagnosed by the presence of bradykinesia, postural instability, resting tremor and rigidity. PD occurs worldwide, but the prevalence and incidence appear to exhibit substantial geographic and ethnic variability, with generally lower rates reported in Africa (Okubadejo et al., 2006). Much of the variation has been attributed to methodological differences of studies, but genetic and environmental diversity may be contributory (Okubadejo, 2008).

To date PD remains an incurable disease. The currently available pharmacological and non-pharmacological treatments are able to offer only symptomatic relief for patients (Katzung, 2001). Symptoms can be managed with several different drugs most of which either boost the levels of dopamine in the brain or mimic the effects of dopamine.

Because dopamine is preferentially deaminated by MAO-B in the human brain, MAO-B inhibitors should increase the basal central dopamine levels in patients with Parkinson’s disease. The MAO-B inhibitor selegiline was developed for the treatment of Parkinson’s disease based on this hypothesis (Knoll, 2000). MAO-B inhibition also has neuroprotective effects. Since the oxidation step catalyzed by MAO-B yields reactive hydrogen peroxide as a by-product of amine turnover, the generated hydrogen peroxide and other reactive oxygen species may cause deterioration in neuronal function or eventually lead to neuronal death. MAO inhibitors reduce oxidant stress by limiting the formation of this reactive species and, hence, may contribute to the control of the aging process (Knoll, 2000). The enzymatic activity of MAO-B increases with age, and is particularly high around senile plaques (Yamada and Yasuhara, 2004).

A disadvantage of the treatment is that (R)-deprenyl is metabolized to (R)-ethamphetamine which has vasopressor properties (Vlok et al., 2006). Due to the disadvantage of the side effects associated with the traditional non-selective irreversible MAOIs (e.g. ‘cheese effect’) coupled with the potential therapeutic value of new inhibitors that are reversible and selective towards either MAO-A or MAO-B, the search for new MAO inhibitors is validated (Vlok et al., 2006).

# 5.5. Studies on plants used to treat Parkinson’s disease in South Africa

In a study of 20 southern African traditionally used plants which were screened for MAO inhibition and specific MAO-B inhibition activity, the non-polar extracts of Ruta graveolens L. (an exotic species that has been incorporated into South African traditional medicine) leaf material exhibited good MAO inhibitory activity (ethyl acetate extract = IC50 5 g/ml; petroleum ether extract = 3 g/ml) and specific MAO-B inhibition (ethyl acetate extract = IC50 7 g/ml; petroleum ether extract = 3 g/ml) (Stafford et al., 2007). Schotia brachypetala Sond., Mentha aquatica L. and Gasteria croucheri (Hook.f.) Baker also exhibited good MAO-B inhibition activity. MAO activity was detected using a continuous peroxidaselinked photometric assay which was carried out in the 96-well microplate format modified from Holt et al. (1997) and Schmidt et al. (2003). Positive controls were clorgyline (selective MAO-A inhibitor) and selegiline (R-deprenyl) (selective MAO-B inhibitor) which exhibited IC50 values of 31 nM and 111 nM, respectively.

Naringenin, a flavonoid was later isolated from a 70% ethanol extract of Mentha aquatic, an indigenous mint to Africa and Europe, by bioassay-guided isolation using the same continuous peroxidase-linked photometric assay (Olsen et al., 2008). The IC50 values for MAO inhibition by naringenin were found to be 342 33 M for the rat liver mitochondrial fraction, 955 129 M for MAO-A and 288 18 M for MAO-B. It has been considered doubtful whether plant constituents, especially flavonoids, are able to reach the brain. Naringenin has been shown to pass the blood–brain barrier (Youdim et al., 2004), which means that it can exert an effect on the CNS. Naringenin has been shown to have many effects outside the CNS, such as being a cancer chemopreventive agent, a mutagenic inhibitor, a genotoxicology inhibitor, and having antioxidant, hypocholesterolic, antibacterial, antiviral, antiallergic, antiangionetic, apopotic and cytostatic activity (Hodek et al., 2002). This non-selectivity might limit the compound’s clinical use.

The antiparkinsonian effect of Withana somnifera has been reviewed elsewhere (Kulkarni and Dhir, 2008; Gupta and Rana, 2007). In short, Withana somnifera significantly inhibited haloperidol or reserpine induced catalepsy; reversed all parameter of oxidative stress in the 6-hydroxydopamine model in rats and reduced reserpine-induced vacuous chewing movements and tongue protrusions in animal models of tardive dyskinesia (Kulkarni and Dhir, 2008; Gupta and Rana, 2007).

# 5.6. Conclusions

Using ethnobotanical knowledge as a guide in deciding which southern African plants to screen for the treatment of age-related CNS ailments is perhaps not the best option, due to the relatively small number of such traditional treatments. Taxonomic based decisions, such as screening southern African Amaryllidaceae for AChE inhibitors, on the knowledge that European genera have given promising candidates, may be more successful. To date only one alkaloid, 1-O-acetyllycorine from Crinum moorei Hook.f., has shown activity comparable to that exhibited by galanthamine. Perhaps further studies on other Amaryllidaceae genera, such as Apodolirion Baker, Brunsvigia Heist., Cyrtanthus Aiton, Gethyllis L., Haemanthus L. and Strumaria Jacq. ex Willd. may yield novel alkaloids with promising activity.

Steroidal alkaloids of members of the Buxaceae, Sarcococca Lindl. and Buxus L. species have shown anti-cholinesterase activities by Atta-ur-Rahman and Choudhary’s group (Choudhary et al., 2003, 2005; Atta-ur-Rahman et al., 2004). There are only to representative of this family in South Africa, Buxus macowanii Oliv. and Buxus natalensis (Oliv.) Hutch. which have not been investigated for cholinesterase inhibitory activity.

# 6. Concluding remarks

In this review we have seen that a number of plants used in traditional medicine for mental health problems have shown activity in bioassays for selected targets matching their traditional usage. For the plants used for dementia and age-related problems, inhibition of the enzymes acetylcholinesterase or monoamine oxidase B seems to be the mechanisms of action, whereas the plants used for epilepsy and convulsion, and for depression, might influence more than one type of receptor system. Several plants seem to hold potential for further investigation and development for treatment of depression, where both in vitro and in vivo studies support activity.

In some cases the active constituents have been isolated and structures elucidated. This has made it possible to gain further information on how the compounds act. QSAR studies on Amaryllidaceae alkaloids isolated from Crinum and Cyrthanthus species has revealed a possible new mechanism of action. One of the alkaloids, 1-O-acetyllycorine, was more active than galanthamine, currently in clinical use, which indicate potential for further development.

Knowledge of active constituents opens up a possibility for development of standardized products, which would help secure a more reliable medication for patients. This could be a business opportunity for companies developing traditional medicine products. Overall, the findings reported in this review yield creditability to some of the practices used in South African traditional medicine in the treatment of mental illness.

# References

Adams, M., Gmünder, F., Hamburger, M., 2007. Plants traditionally used in age related brain disorders—a survey of ethnobotanical literature. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 113, 363–381.   
Adesina, S.K., 1982. Studies on some plants used as anticonvulsants in Amerindian and African traditional medicine. Fitoterapia 5–6, 147–162.   
Ahuja, M., 1965. Medicinal Plants of Saharanpur: Survey of Medicinal Plants. Dharmpal Vidyalankar Publishers, Saharanpur.   
Amabeoku, G.J., Green, I., Kabatende, J., 2007. Anticonvulsant activity of Cotyledon orbiculata L. (Crassulaceae) leaf extract in mice. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 112, 101–107.   
Andermann, L., 1995. Epilepsy in developing countries. Transcultural Psychiatric Research Review 32, 351–384.   
Arnold, H.-J., Gulumian, M., 1984. Pharmacoepia of traditional medicine in Venda. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 12, 35–74.   
Ashton, E.H., 1943. Medicine, magic and sorcery among the Southern Sotho. Communications from the School of African Studies Cape Town, New Series 10, pp. 1–32.   
Atta-ur-Rahman, Feroz, F., Naeem, I., Zaheer-ul-Haq, Nawaz, S.A., Khan, N., Khan, M.R., Choudhary, M.I., 2004. New pregnane-type steroidal alkaloids from Sarcococca saligna and their cholinesterase inhibitory activity. Steroids 69, 735–741.   
Avallone, R., Zanoli, P., Puia, G., Kleinschnitz, M., Schreier, P., Baraldi, M., 2000. Pharmacological profile of apigenin, a flavonoid isolated from Matricaria chamomilla. Biochemical Pharmacology 59, 1387–1394.   
Ayensu, E.S., 1978. Medicinal Plants of West Africa. Algonac, Michigan, Reference Publications Inc.   
Baskind, R., Birbeck, G.L., 2005. Epilepsy-associated stigma in sub-Saharan Africa: the social landscape of a disease. Epilepsy and Behavior 7, 68–73.   
Batten, A., Bokelmann, H., 1966. Wild flowers of the Eastern Cape Province. Cape and Transvaal Printers Ltd., Cape Town.   
Bienvenu, E., Amabeoku, G.J., Eagles, P.K., Scott, G., Springfield, E.P., 2002. Anticonvulsant activity of aqueous extract of Leonotis leonurus. Phytomedicine 9, 217–223.   
Bolofo, R.N., Johnson, C.T., 1988. The identification of “Isicakathi” and its medicinal use in Transkei. Bothalia 18, 125–130.   
Bradshaw, D., Groenewald, P., Laubscher, R., Nannan, N., Nojilana, B., Norman, R., Pieterse, D., Schneider, M., 2003. Initial estimates from South African National Burden of Disease Study, 2000. Medical Research Policy Brief, pp. 1–4.   
Brinkhaus, B., Lindner, M., Schuppan, D., Hahn, E.G., 2000. Chemical, pharmacological and clinical profile of the East Asian medical plant Centella asiatica. Phytomedicine 7, 427–448.   
Broster, J., 1981. Amagqirha, Religion, Magic and Medicine in Transkei. Cape Town, Via Africa.   
Bryant, A.T., 1966. Zulu Medicine and Medicine-Men. Struik, Cape Town.   
Chandra, V., Ganguli, M., Ratcliff, G., 1994. Studies of the epidemiology of dementia: comparisons between developed and developing countries. Aging Clinical Experimental Research 6, 307–321.   
Chatterjee, T.K., Chakarbotty, A., Pathak, M., 1992. Effect of plant extract Centella asiatica (Linn.) on cold restraint stress ulcer in rats. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology 30, 889–891.   
Chevallier, A., 1996. The Encyclopedia of Medicinal Plants. Dorling Kindersley, London.   
Chiej, R., 1984. Encyclopaedia of Medicinal Plants. MacDonald Publishers.   
Chinemana, F., Drummond, R.B., Mavi, S., De Zoysa, I., 1985. Indigenous plant remedies in Zimbabwe. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 14, 159–172.   
Choudhary, M.I., Salma, S., Shehnaz, P., Asaad, K., Abdul, M.A.S., Atta-Ur-Rahman, Masood, P., 2003. New triterpenoid alkaloid cholinesterase inhibitors from Buxus hyrcana. Journal of Natural Products 66, 739–742.   
Choudhary, M.I., Prasad, D.K., Ahmad, N.S., Rosa, R., Atta-ur-Rahman, 2005. Cholinesterase inhibitory pregnane-type steroidal alkaloids from Sarcococca hookeriana. Steroids 70, 295–303.   
Christianson, A.L., Zwane, M.E., Manga, P., Rosen, E., Venter, A., Kromberg, J.G., 2000. Epilepsy in rural South African children – prevalence, associated disability and management. South African Medical Journal 90, 262–266.   
Coates-Palgrave, K., 2002. Trees of Southern Africa, 3 ed. Struik, Cape Town.   
Daels-Rakotoarison, D.A., Seidel, V., Gressier, B., Brunte, C., Tillequin, F., Bailleul, F., Luyckx, M., Dine, T., Cazini, M., Cazin, J.C., 2000. Neurosedative and antioxidant activities of phenylpropanoids from Ballota nigra. Arzneimittel Forschung 50, 16–23.   
Dalziel, J.M., 1937. The Useful Plants of West Tropical Africa. Crown Agents for the Colonies, London.   
Debella, A., Kunert, O., Schmid, M.G., Michl, G., Bucar, F., Abebe, D., Haslinger, E., 2000. A diterpene, a flavonol glycoside, and a phytosterol glycoside from Securidaca longipedunculata and Entada abyssinica. Monatshefte fuer Chemie 131, 401–408.   
DeGiorgio, C., Pietsch-Escueta, S., Tsang, V., Corral-Leyva, G., Ng, L., Medina, M.T., Astudillo, S., Padilla, N., Leyva, P., Martinez, L., Noh, J., Levine, M., Villasenor, R., Sorvillo, F., 2005. Sero-prevalence of Taenia solium Cysticercosis and Taenia solium Taeniasis in California, USA. Acta Neurologica Scandinavica 111, 84–88.   
De Jager, E.J., 1963. Notes on the magical charms of the Cape Nguni tribes. Fort Hare Papers 2, 293–309.   
Dent, G.R., Nyembezi, C.L.S., 1999. Scholar’s Zulu Dictionary; English-Zulu, ZuluEnglish. Shuter and Shooter (Pty) Ltd, Pietermaritzburg.   
De Rijk, M.C., Launer, L.J., Berger, K., Breteler, M.M., Dartigues, J.F., Baldereschi, M., et al., 2000. Prevalence of Parkinson’s disease in Europe: a collaborative study of population-based cohorts. Neurology 54, S21–S23.   
De Smet, P.A.G.M., 1996. Some ethnopharmacological notes on African hallucinogens. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 50, 141–146.   
De Villiers, C., Louw, S.J., 1996. Determining the prevalence of Alzheimer’s disease in elderly South Africans. South African Medical Journal 86, 135–136.   
Diop, A.G., Hesdorffer, D.C., Logroscino, G., Hauser, W.A., 2005. Epilepsy and mortality in Africa: a review of the literature. Epilepsia 46, 33–35.   
Dobkin De Rios, M., 1986. Enigma of drug-induced altered states of consciousness among the !Kung Bushmen of the Kalahari desert. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 15, 297–304.   
Doke, C.M., Vilakazi, B.W., 1972. Zulu–English Dictionary, 2nd ed. Witwatersrand University Press, Johannesburg.   
Dorrington, R., Bourne, D., Bradshaw, D., Laubscher, R., 2001. Technical Report on the Impact of HIV/AIDS on Adult Mortality in South Africa, 5.   
Eastman, R., 2005. Epilepsy in South Africa. Acta Neurolica Scandinavica 112, 8–11.   
Elgorashi, E.E., Drewes, S.E., Van Staden, J., 2001. Alkaloids from Crinum moorei. Phytochemistry 56, 637–640.   
Elgorashi, E.E., Stafford, G.I., van Staden, J., 2004. Acetylcholinesterase enzyme inhibitory effects of Amaryllidaceae alkaloids. Planta Medica 70, 260–262.   
Elgorashi, E.E., Stafford, G.I., Jäger, A.K., van Staden, J., 2006a. Inhibition of [3H]citalopram binding to the rat brain serotonin transporter by Amaryllidaceae alkaloids. Planta Medica 72, 470–473.   
Elgorashi, E.E., Malan, S.F., Stafford, G.I., van Staden, J., 2006b. Quantitative structure–activity relationship studies on acetylcholinesterase enzyme inhibitory effects of Amaryllidaceae alkaloids. South African Journal of Botany 72, 224–231.   
Ellman, G.L., Courtney, K.D., Andres, V., Featherstone, R.M., 1961. A new and rapid colorimetric determination of acetylcholinesterase activity. Biochemistry and Pharmacology 7, 88–95.   
Felter, H.W., Lloyd, J.U., 1898. King’s American Dispensatory, 18th ed. Ohio Valley Co., Cincinnatti, OH.   
Fukunishi, I., Matsumoto, T., Negishi, M., Hayashi, M., Hosaka, T., Moriya, J., 1997. Somatic complaints associated with depressive symptoms in HIV-positive patients. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics 66, 248–251.   
Garcia, H.H., Gonzalez, A.E., Evans, C.A., Gilman, R.H., 2003. Cysticercosis Working Group in Peru. Taenia solium cysticercosis. Lancet 362, 547–556.   
Garg, R.K., 1999. HIV infection and seizures. Postgraduate Medical Journal 75, 387–390.   
Gelfand, M., Mavi, S., Drummond, R.B., Ndemera, B., 1985. The Traditional Medical Practitioner in Zimbabwe. Mambo Press, Zimbabwe.   
Gericke, N.P., Van Wyk, B.-E., 2001. United States Patent 6,288,104: Pharmaceutical compositions containing mesembrine and related compounds. Inventors: Gericke, N.P., Van Wyk, B.E. Assignee: African Natural Health CC.   
Gerstner, J., 1939. A preliminary checklist of Zulu names of plants with short notes. Bantu Studies 13, 49–64, 131–149, 307–326.   
Gerstner, J., 1941. A preliminary checklist of Zulu names of plants with short notes. Bantu Studies 15, 369–383.   
Gibbs, R.D., 1974. Chemotaxonomy of flowering plants. vol. I. Constituents, Montreal.   
Githens, T.S., 1949. Drug Plants of Africa. African Handbooks. University of Pennsylvania Press, The University Museum, USA.   
Grossberg, G.T., 2003. Cholinesterase inhibitors for the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease: getting on and staying on. Current Therapeutic Research 64, 216–235.   
Guillemin, G.J., Brew, B.J., 2007. Chronic HIV infection leads to an Alzheimer’s disease like illness. Involvement of the kynurenine pathway. International Congress Series 1304, 324–334.   
Gupta, G.L., Kumar, H.M.V., Srivastava, A.K., 2003. Effect of Centella asiatica on pentylenetetrazole-induced kindling, cognition and oxidative stress in rats. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior 74, 579–585.   
Gupta, G.L., Rana, A.C., 2007. PHCOG MAG.: plant review Withana somnifera (Ashwgandha): a review. Pharmacognosy Reviews 1, 129–136.   
Gurib-Fakim, A., Sewraj, M., Gueho, J., Dulloo, E., 1993. Medical ethnobotany of some weeds of Mauritius and Rodrigues. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 39, 175–185.   
Haerdi, F., 1964. Die Eingeborenen-Heiplipflazen des Ulanga-Distriktes Tangajikas (Ostafrika). Acta Tropica Supplementum 8, 1–278.   
Hanrahan, J.R., Chebib, M., Davucheron, N.M., Hall, B.J., Johnston, G.A.R., 2003. Semisynthetic preparation of amentoflavone: a negative modulator at GABAA receptors. Bioorganic and Medicinal Chemistry Letters 13, 2281–2284.   
Harber, R., 2002. We need to structure our environment to combat AIDS. The Mail and Guardian, 17th May.   
Hazra, R., Ray, K., Guha, D., 2007. Inhibitory role of Acorus calamus in ferric chlorideinduced epileptogenesis in rat. Human & Experimental Toxicology 26, 947–953.   
Heaney, D.C., MacDonald, B.K., Everitt, A., Stevenson, S., Leonardi, G.S., Wilkinson, P., Sander, J.W., 2002. Socioeconomic variation in incidence of epilepsy: prospective community based study in south east England. British Medical Journal 325, 1013–1016.   
Hedberg, I., Staugard, F., 1989. Traditional Medicinal Plants: Traditional Medicine in Botswana. Gabarone, Ipeleng.   
Heila, H., Isometsa, E.T., Henriksson, M.M., Heikkinen, M.E., Marttunen, M.J., Lonnqvist, J.K., 1997. Suicide and schizophrenia: a nationwide psychological autopsy study on age- and sex-specific clinical characteristics of 92 suicide victims with schizophrenia. American Journal of Psychiatry 154, 1235–1242.   
Heinrich, M., Teoh, H.L., 2004. Galanthamine from snowdrop-the development of a modern drug against Alzheimer’s disease from local Caucasian knowledge. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 92, 147–162.   
Hodek, P., Trefil, P., Stiborova, M., 2002. Flavonoids-potent and versatile biologically activity compounds interacting with cytochromes P450. Chemico-Biological Interactions 139, 1–21.   
Holt, A., Sharman, D.S., Baker, G.B., Palcic, M.M., 1997. A continuous spectrophotometric assay for monoamine oxidase and related enzymes in tissue homogenates. Analytical Biochemistry 244, 384–392.   
Houghton, P.J., Agbedahunsi, J.M., Adegbulugbe, A., 2004. Choline esterase inhibitory properties of alkaloids from two Nigerian Crinum species. Phytochemistry 65, 2893–2896.   
Hulme, M.M., 1954. Wild Flowers of Natal. Shuter and Shooter, Pietermaritzburg.   
Hutchings, A., Van Staden, J., 1994. Plants used for stress-related ailments in traditional Zulu, Xhosa and Sotho medicine. Part I: plants used for headaches. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 43, 89–124.   
Hutchings, A., Scott, A.H., Lewis, G., Cunningham, A.B., 1996. Zulu Medicinal Plants: An Inventory. University of Natal Press, Pietermaritzburg.   
Ihezue, U.H., Okpara, E., 1989. Psychiatric disorders of old age in Enugu, Nigeria. Acta Neurologica Scandinavica 79, 332–337.   
Ineichen, B., 1998. The geography of dementia: an approach from epidemiology. Health Place 4, 383–394.   
Ineichen, B., 2000. The epidemiology of dementia in Africa: a review. Social Science and Medicine 50, 1673–1677.   
Irvine, F.R., 1961. Woody Plants of Ghana. Oxford University Press, London.   
Iwu, M.M., 1993. Handbook of African Medicinal Plants. CRC Press, Florida.   
Jacot Guillarmod, A.J., 1971. Flora of Lesotho (Basutoland). Cramer, Lehre.   
Jäger, A.K., Mohoto, S.P., van Heerden, F.R., Viljoen, A.M., 2005. Activity of a traditional South African epilepsy remedy in the GABA-benzodiazepine receptor assay. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 96, 603–606.   
Jäger, A.K., Almqvist, J.P., Vangsøe, S.A.K., Stafford, G.I., Adsersen, A., van Staden, ., 2007. Compounds from Mentha aquatica with affinity to the GABAbenzodiazepine receptor. South African Journal of Botany 73, 518–521.   
Jaspersen-Schib, R., 1970. Tbxische Amaryllidaceen. Pharmaceutica Acta Helvetiae 45, 424–433.   
Jenkins, M.D. (Ed.), 1987. Madagascar: An Environmental Profile. Gland, Switzerland, IUCN.   
Judd, F.K., Mijch, A.M., 1996. Depressive symptoms in patients with HIV infection. Australian and New Zealand Psychiatry 30, 104–109.   
Katzung, B.G., 2001. Pharmacological management of Parkinsonism and other movement disorders. In: Basic and Clinical Pharmacology, eighth ed. Lange Medical Books/McGraw Hill Companies, Inc.   
Kling, H., 1923. Die Sieketrooster. Van de Sandt de Villiers, Cape Town.   
Knoll, J., 2000. (−)Deprenyl (Selegiline): past, present and future. Neurobiology (Bp) 8, 179–199.   
Kokwaro, J.O., 1976. Medicinal Plants of East Africa. East African Literature Bureau, Nairobi, Kenya.   
Kulkarni, S.K., Dhir, A., 2008. Withania somnifera: an Indian ginseng. Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry 32, 1093–1105.   
Laidler, P.W., 1928. The magic medicine of the Hottentots. South African Journal of Science 25, 433.   
Lal, J., Gupta, P.C., 1973. Physcion and phytosterol from the roots of Cassia occidentalis. Phytoche 12, 1186.   
Laydevant, F., 1932. Religious or sacred plants of Basutoland. Bantu Studies 6, 65–69.   
Levkoff, S.E., Macarthur, I.W., Bucknall, J., 1995. Elderly mental health in the developing world. Social Science Medicine 41, 983–1003.   
Lewis, W.H., Elvin-Lewis, M.P.F., 1977. Medical Botany: Plants Affecting Man’s Health. Wiley, Canada, pp. 284–295.   
Liengme, C.A., 1981. Plants used by the Tsonga people of Gazankulu. Bothalia 13, 501–518.   
Lindeboom, J., Weinstein, H., 2004. Neuropsychology of cognitive ageing, minimal cognitive impairment, Alzheimer’s disease, and vascular cognitive impairment. European Journal of Pharmacology 490, 83–86.   
Lloyd, J.U., 1897. Physostigma venenosum (Calabar). Western Druggist 19, 249–251.   
López, S., Bastida, J., Viladomat, F., Codina, C., 2002. Acetylcholinesterase inhibitory activity of some Amaryllidaceae alkaloids and Narcissus extracts. Life Science 71, 2521–2529.   
Lourens, S., Naseema, B.M., 1998. Department of Medically Applied Psychology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Natal, South Africa. Cited in Meel, B.L., 2003. Determinants of suicide in the Transkei sub-region of South Africa. Journal of Clinical Forensic Medicine 10, pp. 153–157.   
Mabogo, D.E.N., 1990. The ethnobotany of the Vhavenda. M.Sc. thesis, University of Pretoria.   
Magee, A.R., Van Wyk, B.E., Van Vuuren, S.F., 2007. Ethnobotany and antimicrobial activity of sieketroos (Arctopus species). South African Journal of Botany 73, 159–162.   
Mahomed, I.M., Ojewole, J.A.O., 2006. Anticonvulsant activity of Harpagophytum procumbens DC [Pedaliaceae] secondary root aqueous extract in mice. Brain Research Bulletin 69, 57–62.   
Manana, C.J., 1968. Umongo Wolwazi. African Medical Herbs. Pinetown Printers, Mayville, Durban.   
Meel, B.L., 2003. Suicide among former mineworkers in the sub region of Transkei, South Africa: case reports. Archives of Suicide Research 7, 1–6.   
Morris, K., 2001. Treating HIV in South Africa – a tale of two systems. The Lancet 357, 1190.   
Mukharji, B., 1953. Indian pharmaceutical codex.   
Murray, C.J., Lopez, A.D., 1996. The global burden of disease: a comprehensive assessment of mortality and disability from diseases, injuries and risk factors in 1990 and projected to 2020. Vol. 1, Global Burden of Disease and Injury series. Harvard School of Public Health, Boston.   
Neuwinger, H.D., 2000. African Traditional Medicine. A Dictionary of Plant Use and Applications. Medpharm GmbH Scientific Publishers, Stuttgart, Germany.   
Nielsen, M., Frokjaer, S., Braestrup, C., 1988. High affinity of the naturally occurring biflavonoid, amentoflavone, to brain benzodiazepine receptors in vitro. Biochemical Pharmacology 37, 3285–3287.   
Nielsen, N.D., Sandager, M., Stafford, G.I., Van Staden, J., Jäger, A.K., 2004. Screening of indigenous plants from South Africa for affinity to the serotonin reuptake transport protein. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 94, 159–163.   
Ojewole, J.A.O., 2005. Analgesic and Anticonvulsant properties of Tetrapleura tetraptera (Taub) (Fabaceae) fruit aqueous extract in mice. Phytotherapy Research 19, 1023–1029.   
Ojewole, J.A.O., Amabeoku, G.J., 2006. Anticonvulsant effect of Persea americana Mill (Lauraceae) (Avocado) leaf aqueous extract in mice. Phytotherapy Research 20, 696–700.   
Ojewole, J.A.O., 2008a. Anticonvulsant property of Sutherlandia frutescens R. BR. (variety Incana E. MEY.) [Fabaceae] shoot aqueous extract. Brain Research Bulletin 75, 126–132.   
Ojewole, J.A.O., 2008b. Anticonvulsant activity of Hypoxis hemerocallidea Fisch. and C.A. Mey. (Hypoxidaceae) Corm (‘African Potato’) aqueous extract in mice. Phytotherapy Research 22, 91–96.   
Ojewole, J.A.O., 2008c. Anticonvulsant effect of Rhus chirindensis (Baker F.) (Anacardiaceae) stem-bark aqueous extract in mice. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 117, 130–135.   
Okubadejo, N.U., 2008. An analysis of genetic studies of Parkinson’s disease in Africa. Parkinsonism and Related Disorders 14, 177–182.   
Okubadejo, N.U., Bower, J.H., Rocca, W.A., Maraganore, D.M., 2006. Parkinson’s disease in Africa: a systematic review of epidemiologic and genetic studies. Movement Disorders 21, 2150–2156.   
Oliver-Bever, B., 1986. Medicinal Plants in Tropical West Africa. Cambridge University Press, London.   
Olsen, H.T., Stafford, G.I., van Staden, J., Christensen, S.B., Jäger, A.K., 2008. Isolation of the MAO-inhibitor naringenin from Mentha aquatica L. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 117, 500–502.   
Palmer, E., Pitman, N., 1972. Trees of Southern Africa, vol. 3. Balkema, Cape Town.   
Pappe, L., 1847. A List of South African Indigenous Plants, Used as Remedies by the Colonists of the Cape of Good Hope. Cape Town.   
Pappe, L., 1857. Florae Capensis Medicae Prodromus vol. 2. Cape Town.   
Parrotta, J.A., 2001. The Healing Plants of Peninsular India. MRM Graphics Ltd., Winslow, Bucks.   
Pedersen, M.E., Vestergaard, H.T., Stafford, G.I., van Staden, J., Jäger, A.K. 2008. The effect of extracts of Searsia species on epileptiform activity in slices of the mouse cerebral cortex. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 119, 538–541.   
Pedersen, M.E., Szewczyk, B., Stachowicz, K., Wieronska, J., Andersen, J., Stafford, G.I., van Staden, J., Pilc, A., Jäger, A.K. 2008. Effects of South African traditional medicine in animal models for depression. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 119, 542–548.   
Peredery, O., Persinger, M.A., 2004. Herbal treatment following post-seizure induction in rat by lithium pilocarpine: Scutellaria lateriflora (Skullcap), Gelsemium sempervirens (Gelsemium) and Datura stramonium (Jimson Weed) may prevent development of spontaneous seizures. Phytotherapy Research 18, 700–705.   
Perry, N.S.L., Houghton, P.J., Theobald, A.E., Jenner, P., Perry, E.K., 2000. In-vitro inhibition of human erythrocyte acetylcholine esterase by Salvia lavandulaefolia essential oil and constituent terpenes. Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology 52, 895–902.   
Pooley, E., 1993. The Complete Field Guide to Trees of Natal Zululand and Transkei. Natal Flora Publications Trust, Natal Herbarium, Durban.   
Pooley, E., 2005. A field Guide to Wild Flowers KwaZulu-Natal and the Eastern Region. Natal Flora Publications Trust, Natal Herbarium.   
Potter, H., 1932. Potter’s Cyclopedia of Botanical Drugs and Preparations, 4th ed. Potter and Carke, London.   
Pujol, J., 1990. NaturAfrica: The Herbalists Handbook. Jean Pujol Natural Healers Foundation, Durban.   
Rao Sulochana, B., Chetana, M., Uma Devi, P., 2005. Centella asiatica treatment during postnatal period enhances learning and memory in mice. Physiology & Behavior 86, 449–457.   
Rasmussen, S.J., 1997. The Poetics and Politics of Tuareg Aging: Life-Course and Personal Destiny in Niger. Northern Illinois University Press.   
Ramanathan, M., Sivakumar, S., Anandvijayakumar, P.R., Saravanababu, C., Pandian, P.R., 2007. Neuroprotective evaluation of standardized extract of Centella asiatica in monosodium glutamate treated rats. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology 45, 425–431.   
Risa, J., Risa, A., Adsersen, A., Gauguin, B., Stafford, G.I., van Staden, J., Jäger, A.K., 2004a. Screening of plants used in southern Africa for epilepsy and convulsions in the GABAA-benzodiazepine receptor assay. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 93, 177–182.   
Risa, A., Risa, J., Adsersen, A., Stafford, G.I., van Staden, J., Jäger, A.K., 2004b. Acetylcholinesterase inhibitory activity of plants used as memory-enhancers in traditional South African medicine. South African Journal of Botany 70, 664–666.   
Roberts, M., 1990. Indigenous Healing Plants. Halfway House. Southern Book Publishers.   
Rodin, R.J., 1985. The ethnobotany of the Kwanyama Ovambos. Monographs in Systematic Botany from the Missouri Botanical Garden 9, 1–163.   
Sandager, M., Nielsen, N.D., Stafford, G.I., van Staden, J., Jäger, A.K., 2005. Alkaloids from Boophane disticha with affinity to the serotonin transporter in rat brain. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 98, 367–370.   
Sander, J.W., 2003. The epidemiology of epilepsy revisited. Current Opinon in Neurology 16, 165–170.   
Sander, J.W., Shorvon, S.D., 1996. Epidemiology of the epilepsies. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry 65, 433–443.   
Schmidt, K., Li, Z., Schubert, B., Huang, B., Stoyanova, S., Hamburger, M., 2003. Screening of entomopathogenic Deuteromycetes for activities on targets involved in degenerative diseases of the central nervous system. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 89, 251–260.   
Schultes, R.E., Raffauf, R.F., 1990. The Healing Forest. Dioscorides Press, Oregon.   
Smith, A., 1888. A Contribution to South African Materia Medica, 2nd ed. Lovedale   
Smith, M.T., Crouch, N.R., Gericke, N., Hirst, M., 1996. Psychoactive constituents of the genus Sceletium N.E.Br. and other Mesembryanthemaceae: a review. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 50, 119–130.   
Smith, M.T., Field, C.R., Crouch, N.R., Hirst, M., 1998. The distribution of Mesembrine Alkaloids in selected Taxa of the Mesembryanthemaceae and their modification in the Sceletium derived ‘Kougoed’. Pharmaceutical Biology 36, 173–179.   
Sobiecki, J.F., 2002. A preliminary inventory of plants used for psychoactive purposes in southern Africa healing traditions. Transactions of the Royal Society of South Africa 57, 1–24.   
South African National Burden of Disease Study, 2000. South African Medical Research Council, http://www.mrc.ac.za/bod/estimates.htm, accessed 5 September 2008.   
Stafford, G.I., Jäger, A.K., van Staden, J., 2005. Activity of traditional South African sedative and potentially CNS-acting plants in the GABA-benzodiazepine receptor assay. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 100, 210–215.   
Stafford, G.I., Pedersen, P.D., Jäger, A.K., van Staden, J., 2007. Monoamine oxidase inhibition by southern African traditional medicinal plants. South African Journal of Botany 73, 384–390.   
Svenningsen, A.B., Madsen, K.D., Liljefors, T., Stafford, G.I., van Staden, J., Jäger, A.K., 2006. Biflavones from Rhus species with affinity for the GABAA/benzodiazepine receptor. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 103, 276–280.   
UNAIDS, 2006. 2006 Report on the global AIDS epidemic. URL http://www. unaids.org/en/KnowledgeCentre/HIVData/GlobalReport/Default.asp [accessed on March 1, 2008].   
UNAIDS, 2007. 2007 AIDS epidemic update. URL http://www.unaids.org/en/ KnowledgeCentre/HIVData/EpiUpdate/EpiUpdArchive/2007/ [accessed on March 1, 2008].   
United Nations, 2003. Long-Range Population Projections Report. http://www.un. org/esa/population/publications/longrange/long-range working-paper final. PDF.   
Tang, H., Zhao, R., Deng, Y., 2005. Effects of essential oil and water soluble components from Acorus tatarinowii on SOD, LPO NO in brain tissue of epilepsy mice. Zhongguo Yaoshi 8, 983–985.   
van As, A.D., Joubert, J., 1991. Neurocysticercosis in 578 black epileptic patients. South African Medical Journal 80, 327–328.   
van Heerden, F.R., Viljoen, A., Mohoto, S.P., 2002. A phytochemical investigation of Craterocapsa tarsodes, a plant used for treatment of epilepsy by the Nothern Sotho people of South Africa. South African Journal of Botany 68, 77–79.   
van Wyk, B., Gericke, N., 2000. Peoples Plants. Briza Publications, Pretoria, South Africa.   
van Wyk, B.-E., van Heerden, F.R., van Oudtshoorn, B., 2002. Poisonous Plants of South Africa. Briza Publications, Pretoria.   
van Wyk, B.-E., Van Oudtshoorn, B., Gericke, N., 1997. Medicinal Plants of South Africa. Briza Publications, Pretoria, South Africa.   
Vattanajun, A., Watanabe, H., Tantisira, M.H., Tantisira, B., 2005. Isobolographically additive anticonvulsant activity between Centella asiatica’s ethyl acetate fraction and some antiepileptic drugs. Journal of the Medical Association of Thailand 88, 131–140.   
Veale, D.J.H., Furman, K.I., Oliver, D.W., 1992. South African traditional herbal medicines used during pregnancy and childbirth. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 27, 341–346.   
Veerendra, K.M.H., Gupta, Y.K., 2002. Effect of different extracts of Centella asiatica on cognition and oxidative stress markers in rats. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 79, 253–260.   
Venter, F., Venter, J.A., 1996. Making the Most of Indigenous Trees. Briza Publications, Pretoria.   
Verdcourt, B., Trump, E.C., 1969. Common Poisonous Plants of East Africa. Collins, London.   
Viola, H., Wasowski, C., Levi de Stein, M., Wolfman, C., Silvera, R., Medina, A.E., Paladini, A.C., 1995. Apigenin, a component of Matricaria recutita flowers, is a central benzodiazepine receptors-ligand with anxiolytic effects. Plant Medica 61, 213–216.   
Visudtibhan, A., Visudhiphan, P., Chiemchanya, S., 1999. Stroke and seizures as the presenting signs of pediatric HIV infection. Pediatric Neurology 20, 53–56.   
Vlok, N., Malan, S.F., Castagnoli Jr., N., Bergh, J.J., Petzer, J.P., 2006. Inhibition of monoamine oxidase B by analogues of the adenosine A2A receptor antagonist (E)-8-(3-chlorostyryl)caffeine (CSC). Bioorganic and Medicinal Chemistry 14, 3512–3521.   
Walker, J., 1996. Wild flowers of KwaZulu – Natal. W.R. Walker family Trust, Pinetown.   
Watt, J.M., 1967. African plants potentially useful in mental health. Lloydia 30, 1–22.   
Watt, J.M., Breyer-Brandwijk, M.G., 1962. The Medicinal and Poisonous Plants of Southern and Eastern Africa, 2nd ed. E. and S. Livingstone, Edinburgh and London.   
Weinstock, M., 1999. Selectivity of cholinesterase inhibition. CNS Drugs 12, 307–323.   
Wijeweeraa, P., Arnasona, J.T., Koszyckib, D., Meralib, Z., 2006. Evaluation of anxiolytic properties of Gotukola – (Centella asiatica) extracts and asiaticoside in rat behavioral models. Phytomedicine 13, 668–676.   
Williamson, J., 1974. Useful Plants of Malawi. Limbe, University of Malawi.   
Winkelman, M., Dobkin De Rios, M., 1989. Psychoactive properties of !Kung Bushmen medicine plants. Journal of Psychoactive Drugs 21, 51–59.   
World Health Report, Executive Summary, 1998. http://www.who.int/whr/ 1998/exsum98e.htm.   
WHO, 2001. World Health Report 2001-Mental Health: New Understanding, New Hope. http://www.who.int/whr2001/main/en/chapter2/index.htm.   
Yamada, M., Yasuhara, H., 2004. Clinical pharmacology of MAO inhibitors: safety and future. Neurotoxicology 25, 215–221.   
Yanan, X., Zhiming, C., Ikhlas, K., Yuan, L., 2008. Gotu Kola (Centella asiatica) extracts enhances phosphorylation of cyclic AMP response element binding protein in neuroblastoma cells expressing amyloid beta peptide. Journal of Alzheimer’s disease 13, 341–349.   
Youdim, K.A., Qaiser, M.Z., Begley, D.J., Rice-Evans, C.A., Abbott, N.J., 2004. Flavonoid permeability across an in situ model of the blood–brain barrier. Free Radical Biology and Medicine 36, 592–604.